- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast,
where we discuss science
and science-based tools for everyday life.
[upbeat rock music]
I'm Andrew Huberman,
and I'm a professor of
neurobiology and ophthalmology
at Stanford School of Medicine.
Today, I have the pleasure of introducing
Dr. Matthew Johnson.
Dr. Johnson is a professor of psychiatry
at Johns Hopkins School of Medicine,
where he also directs
the Center for Psychedelic
and Consciousness Research.
As many of you know,
there's extreme excitement
about the use of psychedelics
for the treatment of various
disorders of the mind.
Dr. Johnson's laboratory
is among the premier
laboratories in the world
understanding how these compounds work,
how things like Psilocybin,
and LSD, and related compounds
allow neural circuitry in the brain
to be shaped and changed,
such that people can combat diseases,
like depression, or trauma,
or other disorders of the mind
that cause tremendous suffering.
Dr. Johnson is also an
expert in understanding
how different types of drugs impact
different types of human behaviors,
such as sexual behavior,
risk taking, and crime.
Dr. Johnson and his work
have also been featured
prominently in the popular press,
such as articles in "The New York Times"
and Michael Pollan's book,
"How to Change Your Mind,"
and in a feature in "60
Minutes" about psychedelics
and the new emerging science
of psychedelic therapies
for treating mental disorders.
During the course of today's conversation,
Dr. Johnson and I talk about psychedelics
at the level of what's
called micro dosing,
whether or not it is useful
for the treatment of any mental disorders.
We also talk about more
typical macrodosing,
what those macrodoses entail,
and he walks us through
what an experiment of a
patient taking psychedelics
for the treatment of depression
looks like in his laboratory
from start to finish.
The conversation was an
absolutely fascinating one
for me to partake in.
I learned so much about the past, present,
and future of psychedelic
treatments and compounds.
And indeed, I hope to have Dr.
Johnson on this podcast again
in the not too distant future,
so that we can talk about other compounds
that powerfully impact the
mind and human behavior,
and perhaps, can also be used
to treat various diseases.
Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize
that this podcast is
separate from my teaching
and research roles at Stanford.
It is, however, part of my desire
and effort to bring zero
cost to consumer information
about science and science-related tools
to the general public.
In keeping with that theme,
I'd like to thank the
sponsors of today's podcast.
Our first sponsor is Athletic Greens.
Athletic Greens is an all-in-one
vitamin mineral probiotic drink.
I've been taking Athletic
Greens since 2012,
and so I'm delighted that
they're sponsoring the podcast.
The reason I started
taking Athletic Greens,
and the reason I still
take Athletic Greens
once or twice a day every day,
is because it covers my
foundational nutritional needs.
It has the vitamins I need,
the minerals I need,
and the probiotics are important to me,
because there is now so much data
about the importance of the
so-called gut microbiome,
maintaining healthy gut bacteria,
and the ways in which those gut bacteria
impact things like inflammation,
and keeping inflammation
down in the brain and body,
as well as supporting
things like quality mood,
endocrine function, metabolic function,
just so many factors.
The great thing about Athletic Greens
is that it also tastes very good.
I mix mine with water, a
little bit of lemon juice,
and as I mentioned, I drink
that once or twice a day.
If you'd like to try Athletic Greens,
you can go to athleticgreens.com/Huberman,
and if you do that, you'll
get the Athletic Greens,
plus, you'll get five free travel packs.
The travel packs make it very
easy to mix up Athletic Greens
when you're on the road, in the car,
on the plane, et cetera,
and you'll get a year
supply of vitamin D3/K2.
There's now a lot of evidence
that vitamin D3 and K2 are important
for various aspects of metabolic health,
cardiac health, and so forth.
So once again, that's
athleticgreens.com/huberman
to get Athletic Greens,
the five free travel packs,
and your year supply of vitamin D3 and K2.
Today's podcast is also
brought to us by InsideTracker.
InsideTracker is a
personalized nutrition platform
that analyzes data from your blood
and DNA to help you better
understand your body,
and help you reach your health goals.
I've long been a believer
in getting regular blood work done,
and now, with the advent
of quality DNA tests,
you can get a lot of
information about your genetics,
and how that also impacts
your immediate and long-term health.
The reason I'm such a fan
of getting blood work done,
is that it is really the
only way to understand
what's going on in your system
at a level that can really
inform your decisions
about your immediate and long-term health.
The problem with a lot of
blood and DNA tests, however,
is that you get numbers
back about your hormones,
and your metabolic factors, et cetera,
but you don't know what to
do with that information.
With InsideTracker, they have
a very easy to use dashboard
that gives you that information,
and then gives you some
suggestions and directives
about things you could
change about your nutrition,
about your exercise, and
other lifestyle factors
that can help you move those
numbers in the direction
that's best for you and for your health.
If you'd like to try InsideTracker,
you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman
to get 25% off any of
InsideTracker's plans.
Just use the code Huberman at checkout.
Today's podcast is also
brought to us by Belcampo.
Belcampo is a regenerative
farm in Northern California
that raises organic grass-fed
and finished certified humane meats.
I eat meat about once a day,
In general, my lunch or my
breakfast consists of some meat,
and that meat has to be
of very high quality,
and generally, I'll eat
some vegetable as well.
And then I tend to eat pastas, and rice,
and things of that sort
later in the day or in the evening
in order to facilitate
the transition to sleep.
So I'm eating meat about once a day,
and I always insist
that the meat that I eat
be of the very highest quality,
and that the animals were
raised and maintained humanely.
While conventionally-raised
animals are confined to feedlots
and eat a diet of inflammatory grains,
Belcampo's animals graze on open pastures
and seasonal grasses,
resulting in meat that's
higher in nutrients
and healthy fats.
In addition, they raise
their animals in a way
that's not just better for our health,
but also has a positive
impact on the environment.
They practice regenerative agriculture,
which means the meat is climate positive
and carbon negative,
so you can feel good
about what you're eating
at the environmental level,
and for sake of your health.
You can order Belcampo's
sustainably-raised meats
to be delivered to you
by using my code Huberman
at belcampo.com/huberman,
and entering my code Huberman
to get 20% off your first time order.
I'm partial to the rib-eyes
or the New York steaks.
So on one day, I might have a ribeye.
The next day, I might
have a New York steak.
I also really like the meatballs.
I'm a particular fan of the meatballs.
So again, that's belcampo.com/huberman,
and enter the code Huberman at checkout
to get 20% off your order.
And now, my conversation
with Dr. Matthew Johnson.
Well, Matthew, I've been
looking forward to this
for a long time.
I'm a huge fan of your scientific work,
and I'm here to learn from you.
So-
- Likewise.
Big fan and happy to do this with you.
- All right, well, thank you.
My first question is a very basic one,
which is, what is a psychedelic?
We hear this term all the time,
but what qualifies a
substance as a psychedelic?
- Nomenclature is a real challenge
in this area of psychedelics.
So starting with the word psychedelic,
if you're a pharmacologist,
it's not very satisfying,
because that term really
spans different pharmacological classes.
In other words,
if you're really concerned
about receptor effects
and the basic effects of a compound,
it spans several classes of compounds.
But overall...
So it's really more of a cultural term,
or it does have a
relationship to drug effects,
but it's at a very high level.
So all of the so-called psychedelics
across these distinct classes
that I can talk more about,
the way I put it, is
they all have the ability
to profoundly alter
one's sense of reality,
and that can mean many things.
Part of that is profoundly altering
the sense of self acutely,
so when someone's on the psychedelic.
So the different classes that can be,
the specific pharmacological classes
that can be called a psychedelic,
are, one, what are called
the classic psychedelics.
So in the literature,
you'll see that term.
Hallucinogen and psychedelic all have
traditionally been used synonymously.
I think there was a
little of of a tendency
to stay away from psychedelics,
because of the baggage,
but there's been a return to
that in the last several years.
But the classic psychedelics
or classic hallucinogens
are things like LSD, psilocybin,
which is in so-called magic mushrooms.
It's in over 200 species
that we know of so far of mushrooms.
Dimethyltryptamine, or DMT,
which is in dozens and dozens of plants.
Mescalin, which is in the peyote cacti,
and some other cacti, like San Pedro.
And even amongst these
classic psychedelics
there are two structural,
structural classes.
So that's the chemistry.
There's the tryptamine-based compounds,
like psilocybin and DMT,
and then there's the
phenethylamine-based compounds.
So these are the basic,
two of the, basically, building blocks
that you're starting from,
either a tryptamine structure
or a phenethylamine structure.
But that's just the chemistry.
All of the...
What's more important,
or at least to someone like me,
are the receptor effects,
and then, ultimately, that's
going to have a relationship
to the behavioral and subjective effects.
So all of these classic psychedelics
serve as agonist, or partial agonists,
at the serotonin 2A receptor,
so a subtype of serotonin receptor.
Then you have these other classes of
compounds that you could call psychedelic.
Another big one would
be the NMDA antagonist.
So this would include ketamine, PCP,
and dextromethorphan,
something I've done some research with,
which folks might recognize
from like Robo-tripping,
guzzling cough syrup,
which is something kind of like
high school kids are known to do
when they can't get ahold of real drugs,
that type of thing.
So a large overlap in the
types of subjective effects
that you get from those compounds
compared to the 2A agonist
classic psychedelics.
But then you have...
And by the way, this description,
this framework I'm describing,
not everyone will agree.
Some people will say,
no, psychedelic only
means classic psychedelic.
So there's different opinions here.
But you have, gosh, Salvinorin A,
which is a kappa-opioid agonist,
which again-
- Where does that come from?
- Salvia divinorum, it's
a plant that became...
20 years ago, it sort of popped
onto the legal high scene,
and there's a long history of
this predating the internet,
going back to like the
stuff one could order
in the back of "High Times Magazine",
and most of this stuff
never worked, you know?
[laughs] Or it's like, just
smoke enough of anything,
maybe you get a little bit lightheaded.
But this is one of those things
that popped around 20 years ago,
when it quickly got
the reputation of like,
holy shit, this stuff actually works,
and works really strongly.
In these smoked extracts particularly,
people have these
reality-altering experiences
on par with smoked DMT,
the classic psychedelic.
So often...
And we did the first
blinded controlled human
research with Salvinorin A.
So lots of entity contact.
So feeling that you,
in the experience of one
is actually interacting
with autonomous beings,
that type of thing.
And then you have another big one,
I probably should have mentioned
even before the Salvinorin A,
but you have MDMA,
which really stands in a class by itself.
So it's been called an entactogen,
and-
- What does that mean?
- It means like touching within.
It sort of alludes to the idea
that it can really put someone
in touch with their emotions.
It's also been called an empathogen,
meaning it can afford empathy.
But I think entactogen's probably,
that's the term that I tend to focus on.
And I know I'm not telling
you anything you don't know,
but for the viewers,
the primary mechanism of
MDMA is serotonin release,
and to a degree, other monoamine release,
dopamine, serotonin.
And so structurally,
that's also in the phenethylamine class,
which contains mescalin,
the classic psychedelic,
but also amphetamine.
So just like Adderall is
in that phenethylamine class.
And so this is another example
where chemistry doesn't dictate.
I mean, you can tweak a molecule.
It might have that same basic structure,
but now you've profoundly changed the way
it interacts with the receptor.
So in MDMA it does not
exert its actions by,
I like to say, by mimicking the
baseball entering the glove,
the post-synaptic receptor
side acting as an agonist.
So mimicking the endogenous
neurotransmitter, serotonin,
like the classic psychedelics do.
MDMA works on the pitcher side
of just basically throwing
out more of the natural,
the endogenous-
- Dumping
more serotonin.
- Dumping more
serotonin.
- Yeah.
- Flooding the synapse.
So I get the impression,
that this psychedelic space
is a enormous cloud of
partially overlapping compounds.
- [Dr. Matthew] Right.
- Meaning some are impacting
the serotonin system
more than the dopamine system.
Others are impacting the dopamine system
more than the serotonin system.
Given that the definition of a psychedelic
is that it profoundly
alters sense of self,
at least that's included
as a partial definition,
- Mm-hmm.
- can we break that down into
a couple of sub categories?
So for instance, hallucinating,
either auditory or visual,
synesthesia, perceptual blending,
the sense that you can hear colors,
and see sounds, for instance.
A common report of people
- Yeah.
- that take psychedelics
in sufficiently high doses.
So hallucinating, synesthesia.
And then in terms of sense of self,
as a neuroscientist, I think,
okay, what does it mean to
alter a sense of reality?
Really, what the brain
does in a very coarse way
is to try and figure out
what's happening in space, physical space,
and that physical space could
be within us or outside us,
and what's happening in time.
- Right.
- And as a vision scientist,
the simplest explanation,
is when I move my hand
from one location to another location,
it's measuring the space,
the location of my hand
in space over time,
and then you get a rate, and a speed,
and all that kind of stuff,
right?
- Yeah.
- That gets more complicated
as you get into the emotional realm.
But is it fair to say,
that psychedelics are impacting
the space-time analysis
that the brain is performing,
and thereby creating hallucinations,
and thereby altering
the blending of senses?
Is it fair to say that?
- I think it's fair to explore that area,
and here's what I'm thinking.
Clearly, there is a changed relationship,
certainly, at the right dose
of orientation in space-time.
I think as a...
You know, I'm primarily a behaviorist,
and in terms of human
behavioral pharmacology,
I always go to comparative
pharmacology, okay?
What can we say that is truly unique
about the classic psychedelic,
or psychedelics in general?
So with that description, I'm thinking,
okay, alcohol can really screw up your
time-space orientation.
- And the proprioception,
your balance, your vestibular.
- Proprioception,
- Yeah.
- you know.
And in many ways,
and sort of in those gross
motorways, like far worse,
of course everything's dose-dependent,
but in the classic psychedelics,
obviously the benzodiazepines
being very similar to alcohol.
Same thing.
So I'd want to dig in a little more,
in terms of, like, maybe
there's something more specific
we could say about that
relationship to time,
and space that the psychedelics
are tinkering with,
but I'm not sure.
It's an interesting hypothesis,
the idea that that's a mediator,
that that's something,
that there's something fundamental
about changing the
representation in time and space.
There might be something to that.
I mean, I think of these psychedelics
as profoundly altering models.
We're prediction machines.
So much of that is top-down.
And psychedelics have a good way of,
loosely speaking, dissolving those models,
and one of, the reality-
- Can you give us
an example of one of, like a model?
Like, I know that when I
throw a ball in the air,
it falls down, not up.
That's a prediction that
I learned as a child.
I did not come into the world with a brain
that knew that relationship
- Yes.
- between objects and gravity.
But one of the first
things that a child learns
is the relationship between
objects, and gravity,
and their trajectory-
- Yeah.
And with a four-year-old,
I mean, I saw that at earlier ages,
like that experimentation of, like,
oh yeah, that's what happens,
you know?
- Right.
[interposing voices]
So if he were to throw a ball,
if a child were to throw a ball,
and it went up into the sky,
that would be absolutely mind-blowing?
- Yeah.
- It would be
for an adult too.
- It'd be a pretty
- Right.
- psychedelic experience,
probably [laughs].
- Right, right.
There's a rule there.
You're saying, there's kind of
a prediction.
- Right.
- There's a rule that
underlies a prediction,
that when that rule is violated,
all of a sudden, the circuit,
presumably, for that prediction,
it doesn't have a mind of its own,
but somehow, it creates
a surprise element,
or a recognition element.
- Yeah.
And it's not filtered out, you know?
And this might sound extreme,
but there are these cases,
it was overblown,
and sort of the propaganda
of the late '60s, early '70s,
but there are credible cases of people,
it's very atypical of,
it sounds like they really
thought they could fly,
and jump out of a window.
Now, far more people every year fall.
I mean, who knows, you know?
- Sure.
- They fall and die out of,
you know, from height, because
they're drunk, you know?
So this is extremely rare,
but there are some
pretty convincing cases.
There was one research
volunteer in our studies that,
she looked like she was,
in one of our studies,
she was trying to dive through
a painting on the wall.
She was fine.
But she [laughs]...
Reviewing the video,
it looked like she really thought
that she was going to go
through that painting,
and who knows?
You know what I mean?
- All right, so-
So she was-
- Into the other dimension-
- Yeah, so they're
violating these predictions.
Yeah, the reason I asked the
question the way I did is,
because given the enormous
cloud of different substances,
and given the range of
previous experiences
that people show up to a
psychedelic experience with,
I feel like the ability to extract
some universal themes is useful,
especially for people who
haven't done them before,
right?
- Yeah.
- Who might not have an understanding
of what their effects are like.
Can we just briefly touch on
the serotonin system
and the dopamine system?
I want to acknowledge
that, as you already know,
that there are many neuromodulator
systems in the body,
and the opioid systems,
cannabinoid systems.
But there's something so profound about
the serotonin system
and the dopamine system,
because the way I define
a neuromodulator is,
it's a modulator.
It changes the way that
other circuits behave.
And essentially, it
increases the probability
that certain circuits will be active
and decreases the probability
that other circuits
will be active,
- Yeah.
- in a general sense.
- Mm-hmm.
- So compounds like LSD,
lysergic acid diethylamide and psilocybin,
my understanding, is that they primarily
target the serotonin system.
How do they do that at
a kind of general level?
And why would increasing the activity
of a particular serotonin receptor
or batch of serotonin receptors
lead to these profoundly
different experiences
that we're calling model challenges,
challenging pre-existing models
and predictions?
- Yeah.
- I mean, at the end of
the day, it's a chemical,
and these receptors are
scattered around the brain
with billions of other receptors.
- [Dr. Matthew] Yeah.
- What do we think is going
on in a general sense?
- Yeah, yeah, and this is really
the area of active exploration,
and we don't have great answers.
We know a good amount about the
receptor level pharmacology,
some things about post-receptor
signaling pathways.
In other words, just
fitting into the receptor.
Clearly, serotonin itself is
not psychedelic, you know?
Or else we'd be tripping, all of us,
all the time.
- 'Cause when I eat a bagel,
I get serotonin release, right?
- Uh-huh.
- I mean, there's...
Or turkey.
- And it's very
different than LSD.
- I mean, there's tryptophan
in it, right?
- Mm-hmm.
- But my understanding of serotonin,
is that in very broad strokes,
that it generally leads to
a state of being fairly,
it pushes the mind and body
towards a state of contentment
within the
- Right.
- immediate experience.
Whereas the dopamine system
really places us into an external view
of what's out there in the
world, and what's possible.
- Yeah.
- Is that fair to say?
- Need to do something.
I mean, that's consistent
with my understanding,
and certainly, not in terms of...
I don't primarily identify
as a neuroscientist,
so I'll definitely tell the viewers
that we're far more in
your domain here than mine.
But in terms of how
psychedelics and other drugs
interface at the neuroscience level.
- Well, feel free to explain
it at the experiential level.
- Yeah.
- I mean, it doesn't have-
I think there probably
are some audience members
that are interested in, is it the 5-H2C?
Is it the layer five neurons
and cortex?
- Yeah.
- That conversation, we could hold,
and that's an interesting conversation.
But just in terms of the
experience of serotonergic
versus dopaminergic drugs,
- Right.
Yeah.
- they do seem to create
distinct classes of experience.
So I think that's
the appropriate level
- Right.
- for us to discuss them.
- And in terms of how they...
And I'd like to explore the
biology a little bit here,
and tell you sort of what's known,
and what some of the ideas are.
- [Dr. Huberman] Please.
- You know, have this path...
As you know, these are levels of analysis,
and it's not which one is going on.
It's almost like, for
the particular question,
which level of analysis
is most appropriate?
Is a question best
addressed by the biology,
the chemistry, or the physics?
That's how I think of receptor level,
post-receptor signaling,
downstream effects on
other neuro-transmitters,
and then activation level effects,
and then coordination of activation.
So you've got the,
clearly, with the classic psychedelics,
the two way activation.
We do know that there
are downstream effects
in terms of increasing
glutamate transmission.
So this is likely a commonality
why ketamine is very psychedelic
in a slightly different way,
but-
- Do people
hallucinate on ketamine?
- Yes, yes, and it's more dissociative.
So someone is more likely to sort of
be less behaviorally active.
If they have a really high dose,
they go into a K-hole,
and if they go in a really high dose,
like you get in surgery,
- That's what it's called,
- you're just unconscious.
- a K-hole?
- Yeah, a K-hole.
- Not an A-hole,
but a K-hole?
- A K-hole,
yeah [laughs].
- Right.
- It's very different.
The K-hole.
And ketamine's interesting,
'cause people can take kind of bumps,
and kind of dance on it
with sort of an alcohol
level strength effect,
and that's sort of the classic
kind of raving use of it.
But then those folks want
to titrate their dose,
because if they do more of a line,
you get up to like 75, 100 milligrams,
then you're talkin' about,
if you're on the dance
floor, you're on the floor,
and your friends are trying to make sure
people aren't steppin' on you.
So that's like the K-hole-
- Yeah, why would somebody
want to take a dissociative anesthetic?
Like, to me, it's completely mysterious
as to why someone would want
to dissociate from their body.
- People claim that these
NMDA antagonist psychedelics
are extremely insightful
in a very similar way
to the experiences with
the classic psychedelics.
So-
- And ketamine is now legal
for therapeutic use, correct?
- Right, right.
Spravato, the intra-nasal
form marketed by Janssen,
which is esketamine,
and it's one of the-
- It's prescription?
- Yeah, it's prescription-
and-
- So people are taking
it in the nasal spray?
- Yeah.
- And then,
are they undergoing talk therapy
while they're doing this?
- Typically not.
This is very interesting,
and there's so much work
that needs to be done.
It's not treated as psychedelic therapy,
and by that,
psychedelic therapy, I mean,
you tell the person
they're going to have
an altered experience.
You tell them to pay
attention to that experience,
that they might learn
something from that experience.
And afterwards, you
discuss that experience.
With Spravato,
the model is-
- Spravato is?
- Is esketamine.
- Okay.
- It's the, yeah, the
spray form of ketamine.
It's been FDA-approved for
treatment resistant depression.
You'll probably feel different.
Ignore that.
That's a side effect.
[laughs] That's an adverse effect.
Just ignore it.
We don't think that has anything to do
with the way it works.
But just get this thing.
It's a direct sort of
chemotherapeutic effect in a sense .
It's not facilitating a learning process.
Now, there's older work.
There was a guy, Krupitsky, in Russia
that did extensive work with
higher doses of ketamine.
I should say, Spravato,
at the prescribed doses,
isn't very...
It's a pretty low dose.
It's in the mild psychedelic range,
but it's not very strong.
But this older work that happened
in the '90s and early 2000s in Russia,
they were using very high doses,
and treating it like a psychedelic.
You know, treating it as if
it was a psychedelic therapy.
In other words, telling people,
you're going to have this experience.
It's going to...
We're hoping you learn something from it.
We're going to help you through it.
We're going to discuss it afterwards.
And they found incredibly
high rates of success
in some pretty well controlled trials
for both heroin addiction
and alcohol addiction.
So I think a whole lot of
work needs to be done now.
And you see some of the ketamine clinics
that are using ketamine off-label,
a lot of them are you treating
it like psychedelic therapy.
There's, essentially, no
research at this point on that.
Do you get better results?
Straight up use of Spravato,
there's some good variability,
but its antidepressant
effects last about a week,
but they kick in immediately.
Now, a week is a long time.
For most psychiatric drugs,
you take it every day,
you know?
- Right.
- So that's amazing, but
it's still just a week.
We're seeing effects a year
or more later with psilocybin
and some of the classic psychedelics
that could be a
pharmacological difference,
or it could be that they get
a lot more mileage out of ketamine
if they treated it like
psychedelic therapy.
And so that's some work-
- What would that look like?
- Really, just like our
psilocybin sessions,
which I know I haven't described,
but briefly, you have anywhere from
four to eight hours of preparation
getting to know the people
who are going to be the guides
or the therapists in the room
with the person.
- Yeah, maybe you could
walk us through this?
So let's say, I were to come
to one of your clinical trials,
'cause these are
clinical trials, right?
- Mm-hmm.
- At your lab at Hopkins?
- Yeah.
- And would I need to be depressed,
or could I just be somebody
who wanted to explore psychedelics?
- We've had studies for all of these,
- Okay.
- and a number
of other disorders.
- Okay.
- So healthy, "normal studies",
- the code for
not a problem to fix, but we're all...
That's what's amazing
about psychedelics, though,
because if you administer
them under this model,
and you develop a relationship,
and give a high dose of a psychedelic,
you can be a healthy normal
without a diagnosable issue.
But man, we're all human,
and the issues seem to
come to the surface.
- Sure.
Yeah-
- But we've done
work with smoking cessation,
so people trying to quit tobacco,
and haven't been successful.
- So a variety of reasons?
- Right.
- So maybe,
I'll just ask some very simple questions
that would kind of step
us through the process.
So let's say I were to sign
up for one of these trials,
and I qualified for one of these trials.
I'd show up.
You said, "I would do
several hours in advance
of getting to know the
team that would be present
during this psychedelic journey"?
- First, there's screening.
So it's kind of like a couple
of days of both psychiatric,
like structured psychiatric interviews
about your whole, your past,
and symptoms across the
DSM, the psychiatric Bible,
to see if you might have various disorders
that could disqualify you,
like the main ones being
the psychotic disorders,
schizophrenia, and also including bipolar.
- Right.
- So the manic
side of bipolar.
- Mm-hmm.
- So after that...
And also cardiovascular
screening, heart disease.
After that screening,
then the preparation.
You develop a therapeutic rapport
with the people who are going to be
in the room with you, your guides,
but you're also then
didactically sort of explained
about what the psychedelic could be like,
and that's kind of a laundry list,
because they're more
known by their variability
than it's going to...
It's not like cocaine.
You're going to feel stimulated.
You're going to feel
like you can do any...
Or alcohol, you're probably
going to feel more relaxed.
It's like...
I call 'em uppers,
downers, and all arounders,
and the psychedelics
are the all arounders.
It's like, yeah, you could be,
you could have the most
beautiful experience of your life,
or the most terrifying
experience of your life.
So it's this kind of laundry list
of like the things that could happen,
so there's no surprises.
- I think it's so important
for people to hear,
because the all arounders,
you really can't predict how somebody
is going to react internally.
- Right.
- I want to just briefly
touch on something,
because we left that topic.
But it occurred to me,
that a lot of these
effects of psychedelics,
and how they function, et
cetera, is still very mysterious.
But then I recalled to mind,
that how most prescription
antidepressants work
is also very mysterious.
They increase serotonin, or dopamine,
or epinephrin, et cetera,
but why they take weeks on end,
you know, several weeks
to kick in, et cetera,
is also mysterious.
But going back to the experience of
coming to your laboratory.
Okay, so let's say that somebody passes
all the prerequisites.
and it's the day.
- Yeah.
- Comes the day that they are
going to have this experience.
Are they eating mushrooms,
like you hear about,
or are they taking it in capsule form?
What sorts of doses are you prescribing?
Is there a dose response curve?
- [Dr. Matthew] Yeah.
- And then secondary to that,
I'd like to talk about micro dose
versus macro dose.
- Mm-hmm.
- So how do they get this stuff into...
How do people receive it,
and how do they get it
into their body?
- So they reive
pure psilocybin.
So the mushroom, and
there are many species...
People have taken mushrooms
in the United States,
it's most likely so Psilocybe cubensis.
They're easy to grow.
They grow in cow patties.
It's easy for anybody to
grow 'em in their closet.
It doesn't take a 1,000
watt light, like cannabis.
It takes like a little 10 watt light bulb
and a Tupperware bin.
So those are what...
Those are the types of mushrooms
that people typically take.
We're not administering those.
Psilocybin is the compound.
You could draw a molecule of psilocybin,
again, based on the tryptamine structure,
that's a single molecular entity.
So it's a white powder.
- Does it look like serotonin molecularly?
- Yes, yes, yes.
[interposing voices]
- If I were to show people
the chemical structure of serotonin
and the chemical structure of psilocybin,
it would look quite similar?
- Right, right.
[interposing voices]
- They're basically
taking serotonin?
- A modified version of
serotonin, which makes sense.
But then again, this repeated theme of
the chemistry doesn't
always neatly line up,
because mescaline looks more like dopamine
than it does like serotonin,
but yet, at the receptor activation level,
the pharmalogical effect,
those are similar.
But yeah, I mean, and what it
does at the receptor is an...
It's hitting the same switch,
but then having an alternate response
at the receptor level.
- Yeah, so for people
that don't necessarily understand
the relationship between
what we call ligand,
the thing that parks in the receptor,
and the receptor is the parking spot,
one of the reasons that you can get
such a variety of effects
from different compounds is,
for instance, serotonin might
affect a certain pathway
at a particular rate,
and a psilocybin might trigger activation
of different components of
that pathway, different rates,
and so you can get vastly
different experiences
from two things that
look chemically similar.
- Right.
- This is also
a good reason why people
shouldn't just assume
that they can cowboy their
own chemistry, right?
That what you see on paper
and what you can mix up in a vile
is often vastly different
than what you predict.
- Right.
- And there's a dose effect
curve that's really interesting.
Some of our early work with
psilocybin in healthy "normals"
looked at a true placebo,
plus four active doses,
5, 10, 20, and 30
milligrams of psilocybin.
Body weight adjusted,
so those milligrams per 70
kilograms of body weight.
We've recently published a
paper in our newer trials
where we're dropping the
body weight adjustment,
'cause going across
hundreds of volunteers,
we've kind of figured out,
that you shouldn't really be,
you don't need to be adjusting
by body weight, so-
- Interesting.
- So yeah.
- Well, brain size doesn't vary
that much between individuals.
- Yeah, yeah.
- You know, at the end,
this is a brain effect,
mostly.
- Yeah.
- Probably body as well.
Okay, so the person ingests the powder
or capsule?
- Yeah, in a little pill.
- Okay.
- Yeah.
And it doesn't take-
- And how long does it-
- 30 milligrams is a small...
He could fit it into a
tiny, little capsule.
And it'll take about a half hour.
Well, anywhere from 15
minutes to an hour to kick in.
On average, about a-
- And you said,
the dose range was?
- Most of our studies are looking at where
we want a psychedelic effect
during the 20 to 30 milligram range.
Again, because we have
adjusted by body weight,
and the average American
is over 70 kilograms,
about 150 pounds,
people, in fact, have
gotten more like 40, 45
in a lot of cases,
but it's still a small pill.
The session day itself is not full of,
for most of our studies,
is not full of tasks.
We really want to look at
the therapeutic response.
Obviously, if it's a therapeutic study,
we want it to be a meaningful experience.
And research has found, not surprisingly,
that you get a less meaningful experience
when you're an FMRI,
- Right.
- ar when you're doing
a lot of cognitive tasks.
We've done some research
on of that type, for sure,
and plenty of colleagues have.
But when you're in a therapeutic study,
or if you're trying to understand
the therapeutic effects,
you have to recognize
there's this trade-off
of what you can do.
So our typical therapeutic model,
which, again, isn't just
limited, necessarily,
to the therapeutic studies
where we're trying to
treat a specific disorder,
is to have that preparation,
so you the person feels very
comfortable with their guides.
I mean, ultimately, what
I tell people is like,
any emotional response, it's all welcome.
I mean, you could be crying
like a baby hysterically,
like that's what you should be doing
if that's what you feel like.
And so in a lot of ways,
sometimes people with psychedelic
experience on their own,
it can be harder to
train them in this model,
because in the real world,
people with psychedelic experience,
a lot of times, the
rule is hold your shit.
So several friends go to a party.
They split a bag of mushrooms.
It's like there's a social
pressure, for good reason,
not to be the guy in
the corner of the room,
where everyone's trying to just
have a good time and relax,
like crying about your mother.
Your other friends,
they're having an experience too,
and you're being a drama
king, and blah-blah-blah,
And so, yeah, compose yourself.
Hold your-
- You're doing-
I mean, you're doing therapy for people.
It's not just about the experience?
- Right.
And the experience itself
is very much shaped by that
container, by the environment,
and the degree to which
one allows it to happen.
Once you let go of control,
right?
- Yeah, let's talk about
the letting go of control.
And then as we march through
this hypothetical experience
that does take place in your lab.
So we're using a sort of generic
case example, if you will.
The letting go of control
is an interesting feature, actually,
because one of the common
themes of good psychoanalysis,
or psychotherapy of any kind,
is that there's a trust built
between the patient and the analyst,
and that relationship becomes
a template for trust more generally,
and trust in one's self.
It's actually, the end goal
of a good psychoanalysis
is that the patient actually...
One of the end goals
is that they develop an
empathy for themselves,
which almost sounds like an oxymoron,
but if you spend a little
time with that statement,
it actually pans out.
So the psychedelic
experience is one in which,
chemically, you're under a
new set of conditions, right?
- Yeah.
- Let's coarsely,
space and time are altered
in some way, sense of self.
For instance, I might be going to
a strongly interoceptive mode
where I'm focusing on
everything within the confines of my skin.
Whereas, normally, we're
sort of interacting in space,
and pens, and conversation.
[mumbles] Occasionally, I'll
pay attention to my breathing,
but I'm sort of dilating
and contracting my focus for
different things all the time.
- Yeah.
- The letting go of control,
it seems, to me, could be sort of
the expansion of one perceptual bubble,
to the point where you're
not actually worried
that that perceptual bubble
is going to pop, or that,
meaning you're not worried
about what people think of you.
- [Dr. Matthew] Yeah.
You're not worried whether
or not your brain is going to explode,
even though a thought could feel enormous.
If I keep going like this,
it almost sounds psychedelic,
but that's the idea here.
Or if I'm paying attention, for instance,
to some Somatic experience,
like the coursing of waves
of heat through my body,
that I'm not suddenly
saying, "Is that weird?"
I'm actually just going
deeper and deeper into it.
So it's, essentially, expanding
a perceptual phenomenon.
How do you convince people to go further
and further down that path?
What do you think allows them to do that?
Because I think that, to me,
is one of the more unusual
aspects to psychedelics,
is that, normally, the social pressure,
but also, just our internal
pressure from our own brain is,
pay attention to many things
at once, not just one.
Is that-
- Especially these days.
Yeah, multi-task.
- Exactly.
Yeah.
- Right.
Multitask.
And the more that we focus on one thing,
the more bizarre that thing
actually can appear to us, right?
- Right.
- I mean,
even if it's the tip of your finger,
and you're not taking any psychedelics,
you spend long enough looking
at the tip of your finger,
you will notice
- Yeah, it's weird.
- some very
weird things.
- Yeah.
- Right?
- I think if that as the
classic psychedelic effect,
or one classic effect,
and one I've used many times,
of this example of why
people should necessarily...
These aren't...
One should be judicious
in putting themselves
in these circumstances.
Someone could be having a very
strong psilocybin experience,
and they're trying to navigate
their way in Manhattan,
crossing the street,
and they might be staring into their hand,
and realize, like that's,
their hand is the most amazing miracle.
Like the entire universe
has essentially conspired
to come to this one point
to make this absolutely breathtaking...
It's almost like, I think,
of the simplest form of...
Well, we know that the
simplest form of learning is habituation.
Simply keep applying stimuli,
and there's less response.
This is what organisms do.
This is what we have to do.
And it's like there's this disc
habituation component that-
- Disc habituation?
- Yeah, so like we wouldn't
- Yeah.
- be able to get through life,
we wouldn't be able to cross
that street if we were like,
whoa, this is a miracle.
You know? [laughs]
- Well, I'm so glad you-
No, I'm so glad you brought this up.
I mean, here, I'm reflecting
my bias as a vision scientist,
but most people don't realize this,
but if you look at something long enough,
it eventually disappears.
It doesn't actually disappear,
but perceptually, it disappears.
You have these little microsaccades
that ensure that it doesn't.
- Right.
- But most of us
don't look at any one thing for very long.
- [Dr. Matthew] Right.
- The brain's default is to
perceptually jump around like crazy
with the visual system,
with the auditory system.
ADD, people talk about ADD a lot,
is sort of baked into our
underlying networks at some level,
and then we can force attention.
But it sounds like on psychedelics,
one of the primary goals therapeutically
is to really drill into one
of these perceptual bubbles,
and expand that bubble.
And the safety, it seems,
- Yeah.
- is the safety...
It's sort of like a permission to do that
without worrying that
something's going to happen.
- Right.
Because I've had people
there on the couch...
Yeah, I remember one lady said,
this is probably 13, 14 years ago, said,
"Matt, tell me again, I can't die".
"I feel like my heart is going
to rip through my chest."
I mean, she was feeling...
And I should say,
typically, cardiovascular
response is modest.
The pulse and blood
pressure go up somewhat.
It can be dangerous for people
if they're at severe heart risk,
and we do-
- Are you monitoring
this the whole time?
- We do.
We do monitor it.
- So they're plugged into
a variety of devices-
- Yeah,
so every half hour or so,
we take on protocol,
and we space it out a little further,
further into the time course,
but we take their blood
pressure and their pulse.
And if it goes over a certain level,
we have a protocol,
and we've had to do this only a few times,
but the physician comes in,
gives them a little
nitroglycerin under the tongue,
and knocks the blood
pressure down a little bit.
Doesn't affect the experience.
So we have it all in place,
even though they'd probably be fine,
out of an abundance of caution.
- [Dr. Huberman] Sure.
- But yeah, but someone can feel that,
my god, I'm going to die.
I have never felt my heart
beat like this before.
And the experience of the breath
can be just absolutely fantastic.
This sort of...
And the breath is obviously interesting,
because it's this automatic control,
but it can also be voluntary.
So people get into a sense of like,
my god, what if I...
It sounds silly,
like a stoner movie-
- What if I forget to breathe?
- Exactly.
- Yeah.
- That can be so compelling.
And so one of the...
Get back to one of your questions,
it's like, what do we do to kind of
allow them to go further
into these bubbles?
One, is wearing the eye shades.
We don't call 'em blindfolds,
'cause that has a negative connotation,
like peakin' out [laughs].
- And they're probably seeing
a lot in there anyway.
So blind isn't the appropriate
word for it.
- Right, right.
I've never thought of it.
This should be like inner-sight shades.
[interposing voices]
- But when you close the eyes,
the levels of activity in the retina
actually are maintained.
It's just spontaneous activity.
- And it seems,
and I'd be curious about your
thoughts on this, I mean,
but the way I describe it,
is that the mind's eye,
this kind of loose term we use,
can be on rocket booster.
So a lot of times, for some people,
like a compound like psilocybin,
for some people, there's
no perceptual effect.
If they're looking at this room,
it would pretty much look the same.
Sometimes, folks say,
"Yeah, things seem a little bit brighter".
Now, some people will say,
"Oh, my god, there's waves".
"That wall is waving,
and these curtains..."
On these compounds,
people don't typically see pink elephants.
You do actually get that in another class.
I didn't mention the anticholinergic,
sort of like atropine and
scopolamine, those drugs.
Those are the true hallucinations,
where you thought you
were having a conversation
with someone who was never there.
- Right.
[interposing voices]
We will definitely get to those.
But the reason I kind of cringe,
and I say, "Oh, my", when
you talked about those,
is that knowing a little bit
about the pharmacology of acetylcholine,
the idea of manipulating
that system, to me,
sounds very uncomfortable.
Because the whole idea
of witches and flying,
there was a whole history
there hundreds of years ago,
so-called witches taking these agents,
and then thinking they were
flying around on broomsticks,
and things of that sort.
- Yeah.
- And there's a lot of mythology
around the broomsticks.
It's complicated.
But that sounds very unpleasant.
One thing about the serotonergic,
let's just, for with psilocybin,
so there's an expansion of a particular,
fairly narrow, percept.
It could be sound.
- Yeah.
- It could be an emotion.
It could be sadness.
Could be a historical event,
or a fear of the future.
- Yes.
- And you've mentioned before,
that there's something to be
learned in that experience.
- [Dr. Matthew] Yeah.
- There's something about
going into that experience
in an undeterred way
that allows somebody
to bring something back
into more standard reality.
- Yeah.
- Given the huge variety of experiences
that people have on psychedelics,
given the huge variety of
humans that are out there,
but what are now very clear
therapeutic effects in
the realm of depression,
what do you think is the
value of going into this
fairly restricted perceptual bubble,
what we are calling, letting
go, or giving up control?
Because if the experiences are many,
but the value of what one exports
from that experience is kind of similar
across individuals,
- Yeah.
- that raises all sorts
of interesting questions.
And this is not a philosophy discussion.
We're talking about biology
and psychology here.
- Yeah.
So let's say, I decide
that I'm going to focus on
the tip of my pen.
I mean, in a psychedelic state,
I could fall in love with this pen.
I do happen to like these Pilots V5s
[Dr. Matthew laughs]
and V7s very much.
But I could feel real love
- Yeah.
- for the pen,
right?
- Yeah.
- That's not an
unreasonable thing to expect
in a psychedelic journey.
- Right, right.
- And in the context
of your laboratory model,
which I think is a great one,
that experience will be just as valid
as me going into the experience
of some of the deep
friction that I might have
with a family member
over my entire lifespan.
- Yeah.
- And yet,
the export from that,
those two vastly different experiences,
is one of feeling a better
relationship to the world
into one's self.
- Right.
- So what does this
tell us about-
- How can the pen,
- Right.
- and the processing
your childhood trauma
both lead to-
- Right.
- Yeah-
- So what does this...
I mean, at that level,
- Yeah.
- it raises this question, like,
first of all, how, why,
I mean, or just, what are
your thoughts on that?
- So this is definitely in the...
This is in the terrain we're
figuring out, you know?
So there's no...
Educated speculation is
the best I can provide.
but I think the best...
I think the common denominator
are persisting changes
and self-representation.
- Okay, tell me more
about self-representation.
Yeah.
- That's the way
one holds the sense of self,
the fundamental relationship
of a person in the world.
I mentioned earlier, that these experience
seems to alter the models
we hold of reality,
and I think the self is the biggest model,
that I am a thing that's
separate from other things.
I am defined by certain...
I have a certain personality,
and I'm a smoker that's
having a hard time quitting,
or I'm a depressed person that
views myself as a failure,
and all of these things,
those are models too.
And I think that change
in self-representation
may be an endpoint for
these different experiences.
I mean, maybe the falling
in love with the pen,
the whole idea that you're,
especially in contemplation afterwards,
and obviously, I'm speculating here,
but the whole idea that you could
have such a deep connection
with this random,
obviously, random, aspect of the universe
could potentially lead to this
transformed understanding of the self,
and the pen may be a proxy
for the miracle of reality
in a way that relies nothing on,
on no supernatural thinking.
You know, you can be a hard
atheist, and you take this,
you know, ultimately,
oh, my god, like that,
just like the pen,
this is amazing, the fact that we exist,
and so there could be
an extrapolation chair.
And you used the pen,
but I think it sounds similar to
Aldous Huxley's classic description
and the doors of perception
of the chair and the drapes.
He took 500 milligrams of mescalin,
and he was just like-
- Is that a
high dose of mescalin?
- Yeah, yeah,
and that's a heroic dose, for sure.
He's just going off of the
chairiness of the chair,
like this chair is exuding
the quality of being a chair,
and-
- So this is this
expansion of the perceptual bubble?
A narrow percept that then grows within
the confines of that narrow percept?
- Yeah.
- So a sense of self is a
very interesting phenomenon,
and if we could dissect it a little bit,
there's the somatic sense of self,
so the ability to literally feel the self.
This process, we call interoception.
And then there's the
the title of the self,
the I am blank.
- Yeah.
- And I noticed
you said that several times,
and it's intriguing to me.
But a good friend,
I don't think I can or
should mention his name,
but he had a very long
and successful career
within one of the more elite
teams within the SEAL teams,
and he's a fairly philosophical guy,
also a very practical guy,
but he has said many times to me,
that the most powerful words
in any language are "I am",
because whatever follows that tends,
if you repeat it enough,
tends to have this kind
of feedback effect on
how you are in the world.
The first pass,
it sounded to me a little
bit like, you know,
kind of like internet
psychology-type-thing,
like, oh, the secret
or something you'd say,
which frankly,
I'm just not particularly-
- A little New Agey.
- Yeah.
- [mumbles] If you kind of like
the whole fake it till you make it,
I don't actually subscribe to any of that.
- [Dr. Matthew] Uh-huh.
- But in dissecting that a
little bit further with him,
I came to realize,
that these words, "I
am", are very powerful.
I don't think you reprogram
your brain just by saying them.
But how one defines themselves internally,
not just to other people,
but how one psychologically,
and by default,
defines themselves, I
think, is very powerful.
And depressed people,
as well as happy people,
seem to define themselves
in terms of these categories
of emotional states.
So I think it's so interesting,
that letting go and going
into this perceptual bubble,
which is facilitated by, obviously,
a really wonderful team of therapists,
but also, the serotonergic agent,
- Yeah.
- allows us
to potentially reshape
the perception of self,
that's a tremendous
feat of neuroplasticity.
- Right.
And I think, certainly,
more work needs to be done.
This is the horizon.
And I actually credit Chris Letheby,
a philosopher in Australia,
who has a forthcoming book.
It might be out right about now, or soon,
within the coming months,
"Psychedelics and Philosophy".
- That's the title of the book?
- It might be "Psychedelic Philosophy"?
- Okay.
- It's really-
- Chris Letheby.
We'll put a link to it-
- Right.
And so his conclusion in this,
it's a really great book,
and he really plays with the idea,
it's like, psychedelic
experiences come along
with a lot of supernatural
stuff, experience.
It can certainly go along with that.
But the idea is like,
can these experiences,
and including those therapeutic effects,
be explained from a
naturalist point of view?
And his conclusion is that,
the changes in self representation
may be the commonality.
Now, that could go along
with plant spirits,
and the Buddha, and chakras,
and whatever your model
system, in Jesus, all of that,
but it could also be completely devoid
of any supernatural, any religious.
And we do, in fact, see
all of these varieties.
So I think there's something about this
change in sense of self.
It seems to be something on the
identity level, both with...
I think of the work we
did with cancer patients
who had substantial depression
and anxiety because of their cancer,
and also our work with people
trying to quit cigarette smoking.
I mean, there's this real...
There seems to be, when it really works,
this change in how people view themselves,
like with smoking,
like really stepping out
of this model of like,
I'm a smoker, it's tough
to quit smoking cigarettes.
I can't do it.
I failed a bunch of times.
I remember one participant
during the session,
but he held onto this afterward, said,
"My god, it's like I
can really just decide,
like flicking off a button,
I can decide not to smoke".
I call these duh experiences
with psychedelics,
'cause people often, like in
the cancer stage, you say,
"I'm causing most of my own suffering".
I can follow my appointments.
I can do everything,
but I can still plan for the...
I'm not getting outside in the sunshine.
I'm not playing with my grandkids.
I'm choosing to do that.
And it's like, they told
themselves that before,
and the smoker has told themselves
a million times, I can...
So it sounds...
When it comes out of their mouths,
folks will say,
this is part of the ineffability
of a psychedelic experience,
folks say, "I know this
sounds like bullshit
and this sounds like,
but my god, I could just sigh",
like they're feeling
this gravity of agency,
which I think is interesting,
cause regardless of the debates
on the reality of freewill,
I think the philosophy of that,
whether it's ultimately free will,
like pure agency, if that exists,
which I'm skeptical of,
or just the idea, that clearly,
we have a sense of agency.
There's something there,
whether it's the sense of agency even,
the human being has,
and that seems to be, at times,
fundamentally, supercharged
from a psychedelic experience.
This idea like, I'm just
going to make a decision.
Like normally, like you
tell a depressed person,
don't think of yourself that way.
You're not a failure.
- They can't do it.
[interposing voices]
- It's just, yeah.
It's like-
- Right.
- Well-
- But you can, actually,
in one of these states,
have an experience where
you realize, like, my god.
Just like using MDMA to treat PTSD,
and we're going to be starting work
with psilocybin to treat PTSD,
someone could really
reprocess their trauma
in a way that has lasting effects.
And clearly, there's
probably something that...
You know, reconsolidation
of those memories,
they are altered,
very consistent with our understanding
of the way memory works.
So the whole idea, people can actually,
in a few hours, have a
such a profound experience
that they decide to make these changes
in who they are, and it sticks,
there seems to be something like that.
- And that's profound.
I mean, I think, a few moments ago,
I made a some semi-disparaging statements
about things like the
secret, and affirmations,
and the reason I do that
with a nod to the fact that the people
who are putting those ideas forward
are well-intentioned people,
is that the neural networks of
the brain put language last.
We tell stories, you know?
And stories are very powerful.
But I think one of the most cruel aspects
of the whole self-help
literature in popular psychology
is this idea, that everything you say,
your brain and body hear it.
That's actually a very unkind
or even cruel thing for
people who are depressed
or anxious to hear,
because if they hear
that, and believe that,
and I want to be clear,
I don't think it's true,
that they think that it's
very hard to control thoughts.
Is it very hard to control thoughts?
So if somebody says, "I can't",
and then somebody says,
"Well, no, every time you say you can't,
your brain hears that,
and it reinforces it",
that's a very treacherous place to live.
And language is powerful,
but neural networks, the brain,
and the networks that
underlie emotionality,
and perception, and sense of self,
they don't change in response to language.
They change in response to experience.
- [Dr. Matthew] Yeah.
- And just fundamentally,
there are some prerequisites.
You need certain neuromodulators present,
like serotonin or dopamine.
You need them to be at sufficient levels.
You don't need a drug
necessarily to do it.
You give a kid a kitten or a puppy,
their first kitten or puppy,
and the levels of dopamine and serotonin,
I've never measured them,
but we can be pretty sure
that they are higher than baseline,
and that experience will
reshape them, right?
- Yeah.
- Likewise with an adult
in certain circumstances.
So I think I'm fascinated by this idea,
that a somatic and a
perceptual experience,
but a real experience of the
sort that you're describing,
- Yeah.
- is what allows us
to reshape our neural circuitry,
and to feel differently about ourselves.
And I know there's been
really tremendous success
in many individuals of
alleviating depression,
of treating trauma with
these different compounds.
I wanted to step from
the experience under the
effects of the psychedelic.
So the person there with your team,
they go into this expanded
perceptual bubble.
If things go well,
they're able to do that
to a really deep degree.
Maybe it's the relived trauma?
Maybe it's the beauty of their ability
to connect to things in the world?
And I want to talk about the
transition out of that state,
and then the export into life,
because this is really where the
power of psychedelic seems to be
in the therapeutic sense,
is the ability to learn, truly
learn, from that experience,
so that the learning becomes the default.
That one doesn't have
to remind themselves,
oh, I am...
You know, they don't have
to do an affirmation,
I am a happy person, I am a...
You know, I always think of
Bart Simpson
- Right
- writing on the chalkboard.
[Dr. Matthew laughs]
- Yeah.
- It didn't work for him
It doesn't work for this other stuff too.
So as they transition out of this state,
I know that there's a
kind of a heightened,
there's a so-called peak,
- Yeah.
- where everything seems to be
kind of cascading in at such
a level that the person just,
they can't really turn
it off at that point.
- Right.
- It would be challenging.
And then they start to exit
the effects of the drug.
Are those transition zones,
are those valuable,
much like is the
transition between a dream
and the waking state valuable?
Because you're in a sort of
mishmash of altered reality
and new reality.
- Right.
- What do you do to
guide people through the,
out the tunnel,
as they exit the tunnel?
- Yeah.
And I have to say,
this is where we need
more experimentation.
Really, the clinical model goes back
to literally the late 1950s,
and there's been virtually
no experimentation on,
let's say, randomized people to...
We're going to talk more
during the latter half of
the session, versus not.
Versus we have them
write an essay after
their session, versus not.
Versus we have this amount of integration.
[interposing voices]
- In your studies,
are they writing or talking
as they're doing it?
- So-
And it's called a very loosey
goosey term, integration,
but for us means,
as they're coming back
from the experience,
so sort of five, six hours in,
so this is the afternoon,
they've been dosed around nine o'clock,
so this is like four o'clock or so,
just some initial, tell
us about the experience.
Do you want to...
Not unpacking it totally,
but just kind of initially
just have a little bit of
discussion before they go home.
So there's a little bit of that.
But then, that night, their
homework is to write something.
So it could be a few bullet points.
It could be 20 pages.
And we get everything in that range.
But try not to be self-critical.
It's not graded.
This is just to process,
and for a point of
discussion the next day.
So they write something,
they come in the next
day for one to two hour,
depending on the study,
"integration session",
basically, let's discuss your experience.
And depending on what study it's in,
like what that mean for...
You're dealing with cancer,
what might that mean for your smoking,
or becoming a non smoker?
So you encourage them to
simply take it seriously.
And I think this is, again, a sort of,
one of the points that
could be the antithesis
of what some just kind
of social users use.
I mean, this was written
about by Huston Smith,
the scholar of religion,
in terms of these mystical experiences
that can happen from psychedelics,
and how a lot of times,
the attribution to a
drug effect is dismissed.
Even if one has this sense of
being one with the universe,
and it totally shakes
their soul, so to speak,
but the next day, their friends are like,
ah, dude, you were screwed up!
Too much acid for you!
Whoo!
You know?
Like, man, next time, you
needed to have a few more beers
to bring that down.
You know, like this sort
of social reinforcement
for dismissing the experience.
Oh, god, you were talking
out of your head, man.
Even if it's good natured,
but it's this dismissal.
It's not like...
What you want to do is like,
tell me more about that.
You know, you were crying at one point
in talking about your mom.
Let's talk about that.
What was that like?
Do you remember that?
[interposing voices]
- Are you doing that follow-up,
or they're encouraged to
do that in their own life
with the various people in their life?
- Both.
So we do that explicitly in the follow-up,
where we have these discussions.
Depending on what the situation is,
you might encourage the
person to kind of follow-up.
It's really, the basics of
it is, is supportive therapy.
It's non-structured.
It's use all the reflective listening,
and the sort of the
humanistic psychology thing,
unconditional positive
regard for the person.
But I think, if someone feels inclined
to apologize to their
sibling about some things,
like, yeah, go ahead and call 'em up.
With something big, like
a relationship change,
I'd be like, sit on that two weeks.
Don't make any big...
Don't end any relationship.
Don't quit your job.
Don't make any big-
- Do you also tell them
not to start any relationships?
- I don't remember that ever coming up.
- Interesting.
- But if it-
- I'm not joking.
I was just wondering, you know?
- Yeah.
- But it makes sense
why you would want-
- Like if they're dating,
and they're thinking like,
ah, it might be time to
take it to the next level.
Should I ask this girl to marry me?
If it did come up, I would say there too,
why don't you sit on that
a week or two?
- Yeah,
don't get a puppy.
- And let your sober mind-
- Don't get a puppy.
Certainly, don't get four puppies
until your...
[Dr. Matthew laughs]
I have a question about flashbacks.
- Uh-huh.
- You know, one of the kind of things
you hear is flashbacks,
and that people-
- Yeah.
- Do people get flashbacks?
And if so, what is the
basis of flashbacks?
The on-the-street lore about this,
is that, somehow, some of the compound
gets stored in body fat tissues,
and then released later.
Like, is that complete nonsense?
- No evidence for that,
so probably complete nonsense.
- Flashbacks are nonsense,
or the storage in body
fat is complete nonsense?
- The storage in body fat.
So to answer whether flashbacks
are complete nonsense,
we have to define it.
So I really think
these are multiple
constructs that are going.
It's not the same thing
that fall under that term.
There is a phenomenon that appears real,
that's called hallucinogen-persisting
perceptual disorder.
It's in the DSM.
A certain number of people,
a very small number of
people percentage-wise
who have used psychedelics,
will have these persisting
perceptual disorders,
like they'll see halos around things.
They'll see some trails,
like the after image is
following an object in motion.
They'll see distortions in color.
And it'll be like anything else
that's a disorder in the DSM.
It has to be clinically distressing,
and it has to be persisting
over some number of months.
And so very rare, very mysterious.
Some of the keys to that are,
amazingly, it's never been seen
in the thousands of participants,
either from the older era,
from the late '50s to the early '70s,
the people in psychedelic
studies with LSD,
psilocybin, mescalin,
and it's never been
seen in the Modern Era,
again, now with thousands of participants
at a number of centers like
ours throughout the world.
So it seems to be something that is,
for some reason, happening in illicit use.
So now that brings in,
okay, is there polypharmacology?
- Right.
- You know,
'cause you're drinking-
- Did you take
what you thought you took?
- Yeah.
What's the dose?
What's the purity?
- Yeah.
- But then also, what I think
is actually even more so,
and what's likely going on,
is some sort of very rare
neurological susceptibility.
There is one paper that is
a case series of individuals
reporting these symptoms,
and they didn't limit it to
just people who had had
hallucinogen history.
And the amazing thing about this,
is that a number of people
seem to have straight up
HPPD diagnosis.
- What is HPPD?
- Hallucinogen-persisting
perceptual disorder,
who have never taken a psychedelic.
So it's often prompted by
alcohol, benzodiazepines,
cannabis, even tobacco.
And I believe, in one individual,
no lifetime history of any,
it wasn't proceeded by any
of those substance uses.
So I think it's...
I think of it like
the precipitation exacerbation
of psychotic disorders.
It seems pretty clear through observation
that some people with
either predisposition
or active psychotic disease,
that this can destabilize them.
- Yeah.
- A psychedelic-
The same way that a life experience
can destabilize this
- Sure.
- person more easily.
I think of it like that.
There's probably some
pretty rare neurological susceptibility.
We have tended, this
goes back to the '80s,
clinical practice, it ended up in the DSM
focused on hallucinogen,
because I relate it to the
psychology of xenophobia.
It's always the weird other
thing that gets the attribution.
You don't attribute to the thing,
like, oh yeah. did you smoke cigarettes?
Did you drink?
It's like, well, yeah,
but I see lots of people drinking,
and not ending up with this.
You take a crazy drug,
and you can get people to believe
all sorts of crazy stuff.
The biggest example of that
is the cathinone derivatives,
so-called bath salts.
And if you remember,
several years back,
- Oh, yeah.
What was the deal with that?
- the guy in Florida
that ate the other guy's face.
There was a homeless guy
that literally ate part
of someone's face off.
Yeah, it's one of the crazies-
- While the person was alive?
- While the person was alive.
And all it took was one
sheriff's deputy to say,
"Well, I don't know,
but I bet it was some
of that bath salt stuff
that's been going on".
The only thing-
- What was it?
- [Dr. Matthew] The only thing
in his system-
- Well, maybe we can
set the record straight for people.
What was this...
Why would he say bath salts,
and was it bath salts?
- It wasn't.
And so the only thing
in his tox was cannabis,
which we all know,
typically, people don't
eat people's faces off
after they get stoned.
- It makes you hungrier,
but not that hungry.
- [laughs] Yeah.
Right.
- Yeah.
- Right.
So it's just an example of the xenophobia.
Today, if you get on Google Images,
and look up bath salts,
one of the most common images you'll see
is this poor guy's face being eaten off.
So we're just so ready to latch on.
Just like the people of another
culture that we don't know,
it's very easy to assign attribution
to a class that you're
very unfamiliar with.
So I think they, the psychedelics,
got that attribution
with this very rare
neurological susceptibility,
the way that alcohol didn't.
So I think it's not
specific to psychedelics,
but we don't really know.
But we'd look at it,
and our research have never
seen an example of it.
But flashbacks can mean
a number of other things.
I think the most common
thing people experiences is,
what we call, state-dependent learning.
It's returning yourself
to a similar context
can bring back the same thoughts
and emotions as the experience.
So someone used mushrooms a week ago,
now they do something like
they smoked some cannabis,
or they take a warm bath,
or they're simply relaxed,
and it seems to come out of the blue,
and all of a sudden, these,
or they follow a thought
trail that takes them,
that reminds them of their,
and they find themselves in
that same experience again,
I think that's more of
state-dependent learning.
It's not the distressing
component that is in,
and it's typically not perceptual.
And then another class are just sort of
perceptual anomalies within a day
or two following the
experience, which is not HPPD.
Most people have joked
that this is a free trip.
Like you might see a few trails
or halos the day afterwards.
It doesn't last longer than that.
And it doesn't screw you up.
It's kind of fun,
like, "Oh yeah, I'm
still seeing some trip",
most people will say.
So it could mean any of those things.
- Got it.
- So the flashback is...
Yeah-
- Interesting.
No, I appreciate you clarifying that.
I mean, one very common
misconception about neuroplasticity
is that it's an event.
And it's not an event, it's a process.
And we have no understanding
of the duration of that process.
However, the experience of any drug
or any life experience, right?
Even if it's a trauma, or
a wonderful experience,
or a psychedelic experience,
it doesn't matter,
sets in motion a series
of dominoes that fall,
and it's the falling of those dominoes
that we call neuroplasticity.
I mean, the reshaping of neural
circuits could take years.
We don't know.
It's the trigger,
and then there's the actual change.
And so I think that some
of what you described
could be, literally, the
reordering of circuitry,
that in some individuals, might
extend longer than others.
And there is one phenomenon
that I've been told people experience,
and I'm wondering
whether or not any of the
patients you've worked with,
or people in your trials
have ever reported this?
I've never done ayahuasca,
which I'm assuming has some overlap
with the serotonin system.
Probably hits a
variety of systems.
- So it's DMT,
the active-
- Right.
- It's orally-
- Excuse me, that's right.
- It's NAO inhibitors
- Of course.
Of course.
- that allow the
- Yeah.
- DMT to be orally-
- Right, I should've recalled that.
Absolutely.
Well, I've never done it,
but a number of people I know
that have done ayahuasca,
as well as people I know who've done MDMA,
report an increased sense of
what is sometimes called ASMR,
or these autonomic sensory
meridian reflexes, which is...
And it's interesting,
a lot of people have these
naturally, and they hide these.
It's actually something that many people
keep hidden to themselves.
I'll just ask you, if you can do it.
So some people are able to pass
like a shiver down their spine,
or up their spine, consciously.
You know, like you can kind of.
I'm able to actually pass
a shiver up my spine.
I actually learned how to do this
when I was a kid on a hot day.
I was standing on a field in sports camp.
I was like, it's really hot here.
And I could actually
create like a cooling,
cooled perception.
- Yeah.
- I told someone this once,
and then this led to a discussion of,
oh, I can do it,
but I always hid that from people,
'cause it's actually somewhat pleasurable.
And this is a
well-known phenomenon, ASMR.
[Dr. Matthew laughs]
And some people I know
who have taken MDMA
therapeutically, or ayahuasca,
will report that they feel
great relief from this.
They can generate these autonomic reflexes
through their body more readily.
Probably, I'm guessing,
because they were able to tune in
to a kind of deeper sense of somatic self.
Now, on the internet,
ASMR, if you look it up,
it's a little bit like
the bath salt thing,
but in the other direction.
Like there were people that pay...
Let's just say, there
are accounts on YouTube
that have many, many millions of viewers
of people that will
whisper to them about...
Like, for instance, there's
people that will go listen to,
it seems to be women in particular,
whispering about like car
mechanics, or something,
or scratching.
So there are certain
sounds that will do this.
Whispering, tapping, finger tapping.
And people experience
immense pleasure from it.
It's not really sexual pleasure,
but it's this kind of
deep core of the body.
- Yeah.
- It's the autonomic
nervous system down in the
curve of the spine.
- Probably what a
certain number of people
would call Kundalini,
which is another one-
- Right.
- Scientifically who'd...
Yeah.
- That's right.
- Yeah.
- People who do
long duration Kundalini
breathing sessions,
many of them will report
later feeling as if
their perception of self
is outside of their head.
- Ah!
- That they're literally...
It's very uncomfortable for them.
That they feel like they're walking around
with their sense of self
extended beyond the body.
And this is a clinically
described neurologic phenomenon.
- Have any studies been done?
- No.
- I would imagine, that
person might actually like...
Would they duck?
- Oh, what-
- If they're-
That would be
an interesting experiment-
- And that would be
the kind of thing my lab
would want to get into.
- Where they could-
- That's right.
- Yeah,
their body could clear,
- Right.
Right.
- but their projection
- Yeah.
- wouldn't?
- Yeah, the sense of self,
I mean, there's a well-known phenomenon.
In a few individuals, it's very sad,
where people actually avidly seek out
amputation of their limbs,
because their limbs, they feel,
don't belong to their body.
- Oh, yeah.
Yep.
- This is very sad,
and fortunately, very rare,
but also a very sad condition.
Anyway, I think that the
core of this conversation
that we're drilling into is,
this notion of reordering the self.
And it's a relief to me to know
that flashbacks are not
something that is kind of,
forgive the term [chuckles],
baked into to the psychedelic experience.
And I suppose, that's a
good segue to ask about
other sorts of drugs.
Having said, "baked in",
the temptation is to go to marijuana
or cannabis.
- Yeah [laughs].
- But if we could,
I'd like to just ask about
some of the more dopaminergic compounds.
In particular, MDMA.
- Yeah.
- My understanding, is the MDMA
is a purely synthetic compound,
that you're not going
to find MDMA in nature.
- So far.
- There are certain-
DMT was first synthesized in the lab,
and then we thought it
didn't exist in nature,
and then Richard Schultes
found it everywhere
[laughs] in South America.
- Yeah, actually-
Yeah-
- So who knows,
a plant out there
- Right.
- might be making MDMA.
Right.
- But as far
as we know now, no.
- Right.
And we'll talk about DMT and
its sources within the body.
But MDMA could exist in elsewhere,
but has been synthesized.
And my understanding, is the MDMA leads to
very robust increases in both dopamine
and serotonin simultaneously,
which, from a neural networks perspective,
is a very unusual situation, right?
Normally, because dopamine puts us
in this exteroceptive,
looking outside ourselves,
seeking things in the world
beyond the skin, our own skin,
and dopamine, excuse me, serotonin
tends to focus us inward.
Those are almost mutually exclusive
- Yeah.
- kind of
neurochemical states,
but they're always
- Yeah.
- at different levels.
So why would it be,
that having this increased
dopamine and increased serotonin
would provide an experience
that is beneficial?
And how do you, to the extent
that you can describe it,
how do you think that experience differs
from the sorts of experiences
that people have on psilocybin
or more serotonergic agents,
just broadly speaking?
- Yeah, yeah.
In terms of the effects, generally,
on serotonin and dopamine,
I can only speculate sort of,
is that dopaminergic
component necessary for...
Let's say, we know that the amygdala
is less reactive under acute effects,
and that may play a role in...
There's less sort of
control from the amygdala,
in terms of one's experience of memory,
so it may be part of this
sort of reprocessing,
this reconsolidation of these
memories in a different way,
where the amygdala is
not like going crazy,
saying, freak out,
like fight or flight.
- What I should have said,
it seems like MDMA is being
used clinically, anyway,
mainly for trauma,
- Right.
- not just for depression, sorry.
- Although part of that,
we really don't know,
and maybe the MDMA is
great for depression,
and some of these other.
And it may be that,
and I'm going to be looking at this soon,
that psilocybin is
great for treating PTSD.
A lot of underground therapists say that,
underground psychedelic therapists.
So we don't really know yet-
- What do you mean
by underground?
Oh, because they're doing it-
- People doing illegal,
- Yeah.
- but more like
a professional therapist would.
It's just illegal.
And this is a kind of a growing thing.
So we don't really know which.
Speculating, but it may be that MDMA,
for a broader number of people,
is better for trauma,
because the chances of having
an extremely challenging experience,
what I call the bad trip,
like really freaking out,
is much lower with MDMA.
People can have bad trips,
but they're of a different nature.
It's not-
- Well, what is-
- It's not sort of like freaking out,
because all of reality
is sort of shattering,
and it's less of this.
It can take so many forms
with the classic psychedelics,
but typically, you'll hear something like,
I didn't know it was
going to be like this.
No matter how hard you
tried to prepare them,
that like this is...
Like get me off this-
- You're talking about LSD
or psilocybin?
- LSD, psilocybin,
ayahuasca.
- Bad trip.
- Yeah, yeah.
And just this sense of
like, I'm going insane.
This is so far beyond anything
I've ever experienced,
and it's scaring the shit out of me.
- How often does that happen?
- I don't have a toehold
on anything,
- Yeah.
- even that I exist as an entity,
and that can be really...
I think, frankly, experientially,
that's kind of the gateway to both
the transcendental mystical experiences,
the sense of unity with all things,
which we know our data suggests
is related to long-term positive outcomes.
- Wait, I want to make sure I understand.
So you're saying, the
bad trip can be related
to the transcendental experience?
- Right, I think those are both,
speculating, but you have to pass through
this sort of like reality shattering,
including your sense of self,
and one can handle that
in one of two ways.
You can either completely surrender to it,
or you can try to hang on,
and if you try to hang on,
it's going to be more like a bad trip.
So again, I wish there was more,
and hopefully, there will
be more, experimentation.
There's a lot going on
here in the black box,
in terms of the operant
behavior of how you are
within yourself choosing to
handle letting go, you know?
And eventually, we'll be
able to see this in real time
with brain imaging.
Ah, there, they are surrendering
to the psychedelic experience.
Here, they are trying to hold on.
But we we're not there yet.
But I think through clinical observation,
it seems pretty clear
that something like that is going on.
And certain drugs, like DMT, smoked DMT,
can be so strong.
The reason I think that
can be so extraordinary,
even compared to the others,
'cause it forces people.
There is no choice
to hang out.
- I've never done it.
- Yeah.
- I was told
that DMT is like a high-speed locomotive
into the psychedelic experience,
and out of the psychedelic experience,
- [Dr. Matthew] Yeah.
- and there's no ability
to hold onto the self
while you're in the kind of peak phase.
Is that correct?
- A lot of people say that.
Terence McKenna, who's kind of the
classic bard on DMT effects,
he would say, "The sense
of self was intact,
but everything else, the
sensorium, and what you navigated,
what you oriented towards,
everything else changed, basically".
But it's hard to...
When everything's changing,
it's hard to say like,
what is the self that's changing?
What is the rest of the world?
- Well, and Languages is totally deficient
to describe experience anyway,
much less on a psychedelic.
What is McKenna's background?
What is his qualification for being this,
as you referred, this bard of DMT
and psychedelics?
- And we're talking
about Terrence, and there's
also the brother, Dennis,
whom I know, whose-
- Can only imagine
what Thanksgiving dinner
- Yeah, they're brothers.
- is like at their house.
- Terence passed away years,
a couple decades ago now.
But he's sort of the one
who's known as being a bard,
and you can find hundreds,
if not thousands,
of hours of him on the lecture circuit
in the '80s and '90s on YouTube.
But his background was really...
Oh gosh, I don't recall what
his college degree was in.
But he basically, when he was 19,
he traveled to South America,
and actually, on the initial
trip, with his brother,
who was even younger than him,
with some other friends,
and just in search for a DMT
snuff that they had read about
in the Harvard archives
from the work of Schultes
from a generation before.
But they had discovered all of these
mushrooms growing down there,
the psilocybin mushrooms,
what they recognized,
and just took a lot of mushrooms,
and-
- And talked about it?
- Talked about it.
And Terence was basically
very intelligent,
very well-read in literature
and culture person that could...
He was sort of the next
generation's Tim Leary,
someone who could really speak,
get a little closer to the magnitude
of what the psychedelic
experience was like for people.
And he serves, like Leary,
somewhat of an advocate.
I mean, he would tell people,
folks, you could see the
equivalent of a UFO landing
on the White House lawn.
Like, it's right there.
It'll take five minutes.
It'll shake everything in your reality.
You know, he would sort of
goad people into doing it.
- Well, certainly, science
and clinical medicine is,
are just but two lenses
with which to explore
these things in life.
Well, part of the reason I ask is,
I feel like,
in the world of health and fitness,
you have this very extreme condition
of like Arnold Schwarzenegger's
and bodybuilders
who have 2% body fat,
and they look like, to most people,
they look kind of freakish,
- Yeah
especially now, right?
- Oh, especially now.
- Especially now.
- Yeah, yeah.
- And yeah-
- Made Arnold look
- Yeah, yeah.
- like regular-
- Exactly.
- Back in his day, yeah.
- Yeah.
And you have contortionists
who can put themselves into a small box
and wrap themselves into a pretzel.
But from those two very extreme
subculture practices that,
I don't know anything about
contortionism, really,
but except that they get really bendy,
but it's a community that
included lifestyle practices,
and nutritional practices,
and then drug practices.
From those very extreme subcultures,
there's been an export,
which is that weight
training is healthy, right?
The general public has done that.
Or that yoga is healthy.
- Yeah.
- So contortionism
to yoga, et cetera.
And I feel like a similar
thing is happening
in the realm of psychedelics,
where it was Leary and Huxley.
Look, I'm from the Bay Area.
I'm not far from the Midland Park VA,
where "One Flew Over the Cuckoo's" is
basically, based on, right?
- Oh, yeah.
- Ken Kesey and those guys.
There has been an attempt at
creating this movement toward
openness about psychedelics
and their positive effects.
This has happened before.
- Yeah.
- The difference is,
that now, there are people like you
inside the walls of the university,
or publishing peer-reviewed studies,
and things of that sort.
The reason I asked about McKenna was,
it seems like McKenna and his brother
are but just two of many people,
Michael Pollan, et cetera,
who have no real formal training
in biology or psychology.
The other guys who were at
universities lost their jobs.
They were actually removed from places
like Harvard and other universities
for their kind of cavalier explorations.
Right?
- Oh, yeah, mm-hmm.
- And now, things are kind of returning.
So in the same way that
bodybuilding led to
weight training in every corner gym,
- Yeah.
- men, women, and children,
and contortionism is one extreme,
but people generally think that yoga
is a pretty healthy practice, right?
These are matter of degrees, right?
And now, here you are
- Yeah.
- inside the walls of a
very highly respected
university, Johns Hopkins.
You're on the medical school side,
- Mm-hmm.
- or the undergrad?
- So in the med school,
- Medical.
- which is a serious health institution.
The question is to me,
what are the valuable exports, right?
And where does the extreme lie?
I mean, clearly, there's a problem
with tinkering with reality
through pharmacology,
and there's a benefit, it sounds like,
to tinkering with reality
through pharmacology.
- Yeah.
- And what's so striking to me,
is the elements of atypical experience,
atypical representation of the self.
So for the average person, right?
Or for kids that are hearing this.
Kids that are in their teens, right?
- [Dr. Matthew] Yeah.
- I want to talk about, what
are the dangers of psychedelics?
It's something you don't
hear a lot about these days,
and it's not because I'm
anti-psychedelic at all,
but what are the dangers, right?
If a kid or adult has a
predisposition toward, let's say,
psychotic thinking, right?
Or auditory hallucinations?
- Yeah.
- Whereas on the Asperger's
side of the autism spectrum,
is there an increased risk
of bringing the mind into these states?
'Cause it sounds like a
very labile situation.
So could we talk a little bit about that?
And are there classes of
these different drugs,
whether or not it be MDMA, LSD, or DMT,
that you think are
particularly sharp blades,
and therefore need to be
wielded particularly carefully?
- Yeah.
So these can be profoundly
de-stabilizing experiences,
and ones that, ideally, are
had in a safe container,
sort of where someone...
What are the relevant dangers,
and what can we do to mitigate those?
So there's two biggies.
One, and I've already mentioned,
it's people with very
severe psychiatric illness.
Not depression, not anxiety.
I'm talking about psychotic
disorders like schizophrenia,
or mania as part of bipolar disorder.
And diagnostically, this has shifted.
So it's a little hard to say
how many people today with bipolar
would have been labeled as
schizophrenia back in the '60s
when some of this early research
or just clinical observation was done.
So it seems very clear
that folks with a predisposition
or active disease,
they could be destabilized.
And so some of the cases that we know of,
I always think of Syd Barrett,
the first singer of Pink Floyd,
seems pretty clear.
Although, I think the family-
- I don't know
what happened there.
- So he-
- I should be...
Sorry, Pink Floyd fans.
I've never...
The songs are just really long.
- Yeah, you're more of a punk guy, right?
- Yeah.
[both laughing]
So I've got my foot in a lot of worlds,
definitely in part in the Floyd world.
But he basically went crazy early on.
I don't think his family ever admitted it,
but he developed
schizophrenia, classic pattern,
and he was doing a lot of LSD.
But like a lot of these cases,
it looked like he was
showing all of the signs of,
some hints of
that he had that susceptibility before.
And often, this is hard to
disentangle what causes what,
because when do people, typically,
not always, but develop?
When's the modal period for first break?
It's adolescence, early adulthood.
Yeah.
And when do people start
playing with drugs?
[laughs] Same exact time period,
so it can be hard to disentangle.
But it seems pretty clear.
Now, I should also say,
there are cases of
folks with schizophrenia
that say psychedelics have helped them.
There's anecdotes for everything, though.
It's a big world.
- Do the people around
those schizophrenics say it's helped them,
or just-
- I don't know.
- 'Cause when schizophrenics say things,
you have to-
- You have to weight it.
- I mean, with all due compassion
and respect for schizophrenia,
it's a disorder of thinking.
So if they're saying, it helped them?
- Yeah, can you trust them?
Yeah.
I wouldn't be surprised
if there was some kernel
of truth in some cases,
but they're just so...
It seems very clear that
the other side is there too,
and that if there ever is
a therapeutic potential
there for those disorders,
that that shouldn't be the
first thing on our list,
and we need to learn a lot more,
because of the level of risk,
before we start doing research to see if
psilocybin can help with schizophrenia.
I don't think...
[Dr. Huberman mumbles]
That may never be the case,
but even if it is,
you'd have to be even more cautious
and figure some more things out first
with some of these other disorders.
- What about bipolar?
- 'Cause it seems-
- Bipolar disorder, can it be exacerbated
by these compounds?
- Yeah, and it's-
It may be that, sort of the manifestation
of people having prolonged
psychiatric issues
after a psychedelic experience,
as atypical as that is,
when that happens, it may be that
that might be more like a manic episode
than a psychotic episode,
and that can be a blurry line.
The folklore is that,
people go on a trip, and
they never come back.
That's clearly not the case,
because the drug is metabolized,
like for anyone else,
and the next day,
there's virtually nothing-
- But it reshapes circuitry.
I mean-
- Right.
And I really do think,
much like the positive long-term effects
that this class of problems is related to,
the experience and the destabilization
that can happen from that experience,
if it's not in the right container.
And again, these people
are susceptible to...
You know, some people with
that psychotic predisposition,
they lucky to be born to a great family,
a stable environment.
They maybe never have a full break,
or the one that they
have is not nearly as bad
as what someone who's homeless,
and is coming from all kinds
of early childhood trauma.
The disease is probably
going to be far worse.
Having a psychedelic experience
is like one of those
de-stabilizing experiences.
Now, fortunately, it's really
easy to identify those people.
And we even err on the
side of extreme caution
by eliminating people with like, say,
a first degree relative.
In some studies, even a
second degree relative.
Given the heritability,
there's some increased chance
- Sure.
- if your brother or your...
Yeah.
So in an abundance of caution,
even eliminating that...
I think, eventually, if it's
approved for use, FDA use,
we could dial back on
that as we learn more.
I think, it's, again, overly cautious,
which is-
- But you're doing
an early stage
clinical trial, so.
- Yeah, it's the appropriate
place to start at this point in time.
But if you give a SCID,
or another structured
psychiatric interview with a clinician,
sitting down with this
person for a few hours
to delve into their history,
like you could very reliably determine
that this person has either
a psychotic disorder,
or bipolar disorder, or
a strong predisposition.
You can screen for that,
and that's how you address that.
The far more likely
danger is the bad trip.
Anyone can have this.
The most psychologically
healthy person in the world, probably.
You jack the dose high enough,
and especially in a less
than an ideal environment,
you can have a bad trip.
You even get it in an
ideal environment like ours
at a high dose of around 30
milligrams of psilocybin.
After the best preparation we can provide,
about a third of people
will say, essentially,
at some point, they have a bad trip,
and we'd-
- At some point
within the entire journey.
- Right.
- Yeah.
- Now, they could have
one of the most beautiful
experiences of their life, sometimes,
like a couple of minutes later.
- Right.
- But at some point,
they had a sense of strong anxiety, fear,
losing their mind, feeling
trapped, something like that.
Now, typically, when people have that,
when they're just taken on their own,
like a lot of things, they're fine.
They get through it.
They're more likely to be better off
if they're not having to navigate
the streets of Manhattan.
And if they're with other
people, with friends,
better that those friends aren't
also dealing with their
own psychedelic experience.
But probably having
some friend of any type,
[mumbles] is better than having nothing.
So very dependent on context.
And so the tough thing here
that in conveying to the public is that,
a lot of folks will say,
man, I've taken psychedelics
hundreds of times,
and this is like you're fear-mongering,
and there's no,
you're exaggerating the danger there.
So I want to say, it is atypical,
but sometimes, and I have a file folder
that grows larger every
year of these cases,
either in the medical
literature or from the news,
of people that freak out on a psychedelic,
and they get hurt or they die.
They run into traffic.
They fall from a height.
Whether they thought they could fly,
or whether they just fell,
like you can do when you're drunk
or you're intoxicated on any substance.
Sometimes that's unclear.
Or gosh, one of the
craziest cases was a kid,
like an 18-year-old or so, in Oregon,
several years back, that just...
He even wrote about, I
want to take the biggest...
He had done mushrooms before.
I want to take a heroic dose.
The biggest dose I've ever taken.
He ended up just totally out of it.
Ended up in a neighbor's house.
He was just totally disoriented,
disconnected from reality,
and the cops and ended up killing him,
and it was just tragic.
Obviously, an overuse
of force in that case,
'cause he was actually naked at the time.
This naked like 120 pounds,
I think, as I recall, kid
that ended up dying.
But-
- Well, it's analogous
to the reason I used the
examples of bodybuilding culture.
I mean, people there have taken
excessive amounts of anabolic
and diuretics, and died.
Then the contortionist culture,
people would put themselves
in the little plexiglass boxes to do...
At the extremes,
you're going to get deaths,
and at the extremes
- Right.
- and one of the extremes is
the sheer number of people
with different biological
makeups taking the same drug.
And so you can create
extremes through numbers.
You'd create extremes
through dosage, right?
It seems.
- Right.
- Well, this is why I'm
such a fan of the fact
that people like yourself
are doing clinical trials
inside the walls of universities.
Not because I think that psychedelics
only have utility in those environments,
but because it's so important
toward creating their
transition to legality,
and to understand what legality means
for a compound like this,
right?
- Right.
What model.
Yeah.
- Right, I mean,
again, we'll stay with
the anabolic steroids.
There's now testosterone and
estrogen replacement therapy.
Hormone replacement therapy is a common
medically approved practice,
but that's vastly different
than people taking their own stuff,
or deciding how much
they need to take, right?
Like we said, there's yoga,
and there's contortionism
in a plexiglass box,
and thinking of Houdini,
- Right.
- or something.
These are a matter of degrees.
Speaking of dosage, I
definitely want to ask you
about microdose versus
standard or macrodose.
Tell me that I'm wrong,
but I'm always a little bit,
I'm micro-cynical, if you will,
about this term microdose.
And the reason is,
that many people that I know
who talk about microdosing
are taking dosages of compounds that work
that are very powerful
at microgram levels.
So the word micro, I think,
can be a little bit confusing to people,
because microdose implies
less than something.
- Yeah.
- It's a mini dose, right?
And yet, some of these compounds
are tremendously powerful
at microgram concentrations.
So what constitutes a microdose,
and what is the value of
so-called microdosing, if any,
and how does it differ from standard,
or what I can only assume
is called macrodosing?
- Yeah.
And so LSD would be the
prototypical example
of that super potent compound.
- Yeah, how much am I-
What size dosage of LSD
will lead to hallucinations,
and kind of standard-
- So sort of the
entry point for psychedelic-type effects,
which may not involve hallucination...
Actually, most classic psychedelics
don't lead to true hallucinations,
as defined in psychiatry.
Again, thinking you're talking to
the person that's not there,
seeing the pink elephant.
But pseudo hallucinations-
- It's more like tracers
and things like that.
- Right.
- Perceptual blending.
- Yet, some people
never get that, even at a very high dose.
So I think more broadly,
in terms of the psychedelic effects,
which isn't just perceptual,
unless we get into the level,
of as you were alluding to earlier,
a broader definition of perception,
like one's models of the
world, the model of the self.
You can consider all of that perception,
in terms of truly not sensation,
but the perception,
the construction of
putting together a reality.
So yeah, yeah, yeah.
So the psychedelic effects
are typically considered
to start by LSD around 100 micrograms.
So a 10th of a milligram
is 100 micrograms.
- Right.
So someone taking 100 micrograms of LSD,
nowadays, people might
mistakenly refer to that
as a microdose, because it's micrograms,
but that's actually a macrodose of LSD?
- Right, they might,
and that's one of the most common mistakes
or situations that people
get into with microdosing,
is they intend it to be a microdose,
but it ends up being a full-blown dose.
Now, people do, when
they're working with LSD,
and they're microdosing,
they'll shoot for something
like, say, 10 milligrams,
something in that range,
10, 20 milligrams of LSD.
So a 10th, a 5th,
something of kind of your
entry level psychedelic dose.
People's ability on the street to do this,
and I say the street as
if they're on the corner,
but anyway, like outside of the
medical profession to do this,
it varies, as you can imagine.
- And they're not measuring
purity and molarity,
- Yeah.
- or things like that, typically.
- And there's ways to do it.
So even if you don't
ultimately know the dose
that's in the blotter paper of acid,
one could at least get a sense of like,
yeah, having one of those tabs is,
one of those hits is a
psychedelic experience.
And they could do something
like put in water.
It's 100% aqueous soluble.
You could make sure it
all gets into solution,
and then volumetrically measure.
It's going to be
homogeneously distributed,
so you can you take 1/10
of that volume of water
after it's fully dissolved,
that whatever you started with,
you're going to have a 10th of that dose.
So the people that are more sophisticated
will do things like that.
And when they're working with mushrooms,
they'll grow a bunch of mushrooms,
and then they'll say, put
it in a coffee grinder.
I'm not telling people
to do this, by the way.
I'm just describing.
So don't do this at home.
But grind it all up so it's homogenous.
'Cause you can have like
sort of taking two caps and a stem,
hey, this two caps and the
stem that this buddy takes
has a different potency than
this two caps and a stem
that the other buddy takes.
So people that are kind of in the know
will grind it all up
into a homogenous powder,
and they'll pack it into
whatever size capsule,
and they'll know that...
And again, even if they don't have...
Sometimes, they might have a buddy
that'll sneak it into the
HPLC at their job or whatever,
if they happen
to be well connected.
- Not your lab-
- Not my lab!
That's never happened.
Seriously, it never happened.
But they'll at least know that,
hey, I've got a sense
of what two capsules do.
I've got a sense of what five capsules do.
But in reality,
that's not what people do.
They'll take a piece of blotter paper,
and they get a tiny,
little pair of scissors,
a Swiss Army Knife pair of scissors,
and they'll cut up the tab of acid,
which is like a quarter
inch square or something,
and they'll cut it up in 10 little pieces,
and it's like,
- Right.
- you have no idea
if it's equally distributed in that media.
- Yeah, and we can chuckle about it.
But to me, one of the reasons why
this experiment around psychedelics,
this cultural experiment,
and this legal experiment,
we're seeing this now,
but this was all attempted once
before in the '60s and '70s.
The difference was,
it was all out in the street.
The people in universities who were
dabbling with this stuff,
most of 'em lost their jobs,
or were asked to leave through...
- They lost their funding
for this research,
minimally,
[interposing voices]
- That's right.
- and they had to
move on to other topics
- That's right.
- to have a career.
- So these are
precarious times.
We're at a key moment,
where everyone assumes that
this is all going to be legal
in a few years.
but I think that that's
a premature assumption,
frankly.
- Yeah.
- Let's touch on the legality,
and some of the things
that are happening now.
But what is microdosing psilocybin
versus the sorts of dosages
that you described before
in the 10 to 40 milligram range?
I've heard of people taking
one or two milligrams
of psilocybin every day
as a way to, quote/unquote,
and for those listening,
I'm just making air
quotes with my fingers,
"increase plasticity",
which is a term that I personally loathe,
because what does that mean?
I mean, you don't really want
your brain to be plastic,
because you need to maintain your ability
to make predictions.
- It's that balance.
- Yeah, plasticity-
- Order in chaos.
You need models of the world.
You need heuristics, like-
- Plasticity is
never the goal,
or be it, plasticity is never the goal.
- The end goal.
- Goal directed plasticity
is the goal, right?
- Right.
Right.
- Learning a language,
reshaping your experience to a trauma,
altering the perception of self.
But plasticity is a process.
It's a-
- Yeah,
schizophrenia is a lot of plasticity.
[Dr. Matthew laughs]
- Exactly.
Right, right.
And it might even be,
there's one theory that it's
extreme ongoing plasticity,
and that's why people never create
stable representations of anything.
That's kind of a minority view out there.
So what's the business with microdosing,
and is there any clinical evidence,
or peer-reviewed published
evidence that it works,
quote/unquote, "to make people
feel better about anything"?
- So microdosing is the aim
of taking against something
around a 10th of what would be
sort of an entry-level psychedelic dose
for whatever compound.
So like, yeah, with psilocybin,
usually people, almost
never do people have
like pure psilocybin.
One milligram of psilocybin
would be in the range of a microdose.
More likely, people are
going to have mushrooms,
so something like a half
of a gram of mushroom,
a quarter gram.
- I know people that
are doing this every day.
They're doing these every day.
- Right.
- It's like in their...
The same way that I take,
personally, I'm not recommending
other people do this,
but I take some...
I'm a fan of LCL-carnitine lately.
I've been kind of
- Yeah.
- experimenting with that
a little bit, which is not
a psychedelic compound.
I take it every day,
- Right.
- and they're taking their
psilocybin every day.
- That's their supplement.
- Yeah.
- So-
- So yeah,
the claims are, and
they're a number of them,
there's two general ones.
One, is sort of acting in place
of the ADHD treating drugs.
So the psychomotor stimulant,
so like a better version of Adderall.
The other claims are, essentially,
a better version of the
traditional antidepressants,
a better version of Prozac,
you know, so-
- So people are taking both
for attention deficit and for depression?
- Yeah, and the aspects
of those disorders that
we all have a degree of.
Just like amphetamine is
going to increase the focus,
at the right dose, of anyone
who takes amphetamine, pretty much,
whether you're ADHD diagnosed or not.
The idea is that,
there may not be,
necessarily, a clear divide
between the therapeutic need
and positive psychology,
even improving mood and focus,
so it's not necessarily correcting ADHD,
but improving focus to
supercharge your life.
And so those are the claims.
I am...
So none of the peer-reviewed
studies that are,
have much credibility,
none of them have shown a benefit,
and they've tried.
There's only, at this point,
four or five studies that...
And I think for things like this,
you really need double blind research,
'cause the effects...
I mean, there was one
study done in Amsterdam
where people knew they were
taking psilocybin truffles,
basically same as mushrooms,
They're more like the
roots of the mycelia.
- Microdosing them?
- Well, taking what would
be considered a microdose,
and then doing some cognitive
measures before and after.
And the types of things that,
like a lot of cognitive
measures are measured on,
the order of reaction
time in milliseconds.
And the types of effects you get,
as you could imagine,
are ones that like would be,
you would totally expect could be there
from either a practice effect
or an expectancy effect, a placebo effect.
So for something like these claimed,
you could imagine, a sort
of an increased focus,
enhancement of cognition.
These are going to be more subtle effects
that you really need a
good placebo control for.
The handful of studies that
have done that have shown,
they've ranged from finding
no effect whatsoever
to just a little bit of impairment,
like impairing someone's
ability to do time estimation
and production tasks.
So you want an accurate sense of time,
at least if you're
navigating in the real world.
It's different if you're on
the couch on a heroic dose
for therapeutic reasons where you're safe,
but if you're crossing
the street, if you're...
In your work life-
- You have to
function in the world.
- Yeah, which is the way people
are claiming to use that.
It helps them be a better CEO.
You want an accurate sense of time.
So if anything in the data suggests
that it makes it a
little bit less accurate,
and there's evidence that someone feels
a little bit impaired,
and they feel a little bit high.
So in terms of...
You call that abuse liability in research.
Not surprising, you take
a little bit of a drug
that can result in some type of a high,
and you take a little, tiny bit of it,
you'll feel a little bit high.
So none of the...
So far, no studies have shown
an increase in creativity,
enhancement of any form of cognition,
or a sustained improvement in mood.
Now, no studies have actually looked at
the system of microdosing that
the aficionados are claiming,
and there's a couple of models out there.
But folks like Paul Stamets, and others,
they'll have particular formulas.
They're like, you need to take it one day,
and then take so many days off,
and take it every four days.
And I don't want to get
into whose model is what,
but it's always something like that,
some pattern of use,
usually not every day.
And the claim is that, it's not just...
You know, sometimes people get benefit
that first time when they take it,
but they really say, you
need to be on it for a while.
Like a few weeks in,
you may start to notice
through this pattern of using it,
and you're feeling the
benefits on those off days,
like the three or two days
in between your active doses.
So those are the claims.
Again, we don't know that there's
any truth to that working,
but studies have not
been done to model that.
So that's a big caveat.
We, as a field,
I say, "we", as the scientific field,
have not done the studies to really model
what the real aficionados are claiming
where the therapeutic benefits come from.
That said, it's almost assuredly
there's a good amount of placebo there.
But the caveat to that is like,
almost everything in
medicine or therapeutics,
it's going to have some degree
of placebo there.
- Sure.
Belief effects are...
I have a colleague at Stanford, Alia Crum,
who has published really
beautiful work on belief effects,
that show that, essentially,
you give the same milkshake to two people,
or two groups of people.
You tell them that one
contains a lot of nutrients.
The other is a low calorie shake.
The insulin response
- Amazing.
Yeah.
- varies dramatically
between the two.
Or two groups, rather,
doing equivalent amounts
of physical movement,
and you tell one group that
it's going to be good for them,
and help them lose weight,
and they lose, on average,
8 to 12 pounds more
doing the exact same
patterns of movement.
- Amazing.
- And I think that these
belief effects boil down to
all sorts of kind of
network-wide neuromodulation,
things of that sort, but-
- And then the
work at Harvard suggesting,
that even if you don't have deception,
you give a placebo, and say,
this is a sugar pill,
- Right.
- and tell them that,
- and they could still treat things.
I think irritable bowel
- Right.
- was the first thing they looked at.
- And so there's a huge...
so there's a reality there.
- Right.
- There's a necessity in developing drugs
to make sure it's not only that.
But in the actual practice of medicine,
hopefully, what you're always getting
is some underlying direct efficacy
plus the placebo
that enhances that.
- Right.
- Now, it could be that this is...
The real question is,
is the microdosing,
are those claims 100% placebo,
or are they only part placebo,
and part "real", quote/unquote, effect?
My bet is, and this is
totally based on anecdotes,
that I think there is probably a reality
to the antidepressant effects.
I find that more intriguing,
- Well-
- because of the
suffering with depression.
- Right.
- Even if it's a...
It wouldn't be as interesting as, I think,
what we're doing with high dose psilocybin
or psychedelics to treat depression.
It would be...
If this is developed,
and there's a reality,
it would be more like a better,
perhaps, a better SSRI, a better Prozac.
- Which are similar.
- With that being said,
we need more tools than
fewer tools in the toolbox.
- Right.
- And it shouldn't be
that surprise.
Like even before,
going back to the tricyclics,
and the MAO inhibitors,
going back to the '50s,
like augmenting extracellular serotonin
in one way or another,
for many people,
leads to a reduction
in depressive symptoms.
It wouldn't be that crazy
for chronically stimulating a
subtype of serotonin receptor
that you have an antidepressant effect.
So I think, if I had to put my bets on it,
if there's anything real,
it is in that category.
Although, I'm very open to like,
maybe there is something
to the creativity,
to the improved cognition,
which covers many
domains in and of itself.
But my greatest hopes are on
the antidepressant effects.
That said, in the big picture,
I think the most interesting
thing about psychedelics
are the heroic doses.
I mean, the idea that you can
give something one, two, three times,
and you see improvements
in depression months later,
- Right.
- and in addiction
over a year later,
and with these, people dealing with
potentially terminal illness,
I mean, I'm interested in big effects.
- [Dr. Huberman] Right.
- And I don't think
you're ever going to get
the really big effects.
There's also some concern
that almost all of these common psych,
the more common psychedelics,
even counting MDMA,
they have serotonin to be agonist effects,
and agonizing serotonin 2B
has been shown to lead to
heart valve formation problems,
morphology issues, so valvulopathy.
And so this is why fen-phen
was pulled from the market.
- The diet drug?
- Yes.
- A very effective diet drug.
- Right, right.
And it was the portion of that combination
that had the serotonin 2B
activity that was the problem.
And so we don't know...
So all of the toxicologists
I've ever spoken to about this would say,
and cardiologists say, like,
look, hey, if there
was some concern there,
it's not applicable to the whole idea
of you taking something a few times
therapeutically within a lifetime.
But the idea of taking something
twice a week for years...
I mean, even the hippies back in the '60s
weren't doing that, right?
There's not even these...
And even if there was some
heart valve disease problem
that stemmed from psychedelic use,
who's connecting those dots?
That's not showing up
in the clinical charts
for anyone to figure out.
And just theoretically,
there is more of a concern,
if something's going to
happen with heart valves,
it's more likely that
that issues would arise
when someone's taking these things,
like, yeah, say, twice a
week for the next five years.
And so I do want to throw that out
to people to really consider.
- Right, yeah.
It's something I hadn't heard before.
That in micro sounds safer, microdosing,
as opposed to heroic or macrodosing,
and yet, unless...
And in the context of your lab,
and other labs doing similar work,
you've got this,
people checking blood pressure.
You've got people that
are really monitoring
your psychological and physical safety.
When people are out there microdosing,
it sounds like there's the potential,
either through this
serotonin 5H2B receptor,
or other mechanism,
that maybe there could be some common
cumulative negative effects,
and I think that's a really
important consideration.
So I'm glad you brought it up.
What about kids?
So the brain is very
plastic early in life.
It becomes less plastic as we age.
- Yeah.
- Although,
it maintains some degree of plasticity
throughout the lifespan.
The year 25,
not the year 25,
but rather, the age 25 years,
is sort of an inflection point
where the rigidity of the nervous system
seems to really take off.
Of course, people don't wake up
on their 25th birthday,
and find they have no neural plasticity,
whereas the day before, they had a lot.
It's plus or minus,
- Yeah.
- whatever it is,
a year or two,
but depends on the individual.
However, the young brain is very plastic,
and I could imagine, there
could be great risks,
who knows, maybe even benefits,
but I'm certainly not
thinking about those.
I'm mainly thinking about the risks
for young people taking psychedelics.
Are there any trials looking at people...
In clinical trials,
this would be under the age of 18,
Has anyone explored
this in a rigorous way,
given the potential to
exacerbate psychotic symptoms
and bipolar symptoms in some people?
Is there a heightened risk of that?
What's the story with age of use
and psychedelics for therapeutic purposes?
- There's no formal research.
Although, there's a very high
chance that there will be.
And so this is one of the
very interesting things
folks may not realize
or appreciate about the
FDA approval process.
So the FDA already, in multiple instances,
has signaled that they
want to see those studies.
- Before?
- Well, not before it's approved
as necessarily as for adults,
but they're going to
eventually want to see...
In fact, so the MAPS group
that's developing MDMA for PTSD,
they've already signaled
that that's kind of
on the list of interest.
And there's even some
incentives in the FDA pathways
for incentivizing folks to
explore that use in young people.
I know in some of the
work that I helped with
in pushing psilocybin into
phase 2B clinical research,
the FDA said, "Well why
can't you give this to kids?"
It's like, are you aware that depression
is a problem with adolescents?
And it's really interesting,
because this FDA is very concerned
about pseudo-specificity.
The idea that-
- Wait, could you define
pseudo-specificity?
- You put out a drug,
and say, oh, this is good
for men, but not women.
This is good for black
folks, but not white folks.
And now, sometimes, there's a
very good rationale for that,
like when we're talking about hormones,
and for a specific,
for men versus women,
and there's certain issues,
certain disease states,
like maybe sickle cell anemia,
that's more relevant.
- Or Tay-Sachs,
things like that.
Sure.
- Yeah, exactly.
But absent of something of that,
they're very concerned about saying,
oh, this is for this type of person,
but not that type of person.
So age is one of those things.
And also, this recognition,
much like the emphasis at NIH
with rodent studies and human studies,
that you can't just say,
"You're studying men".
You need a rationale,
if you're only [mumbles].
- Yeah, to be clear to people, there's...
It's a recent switch,
but there's a stipulation in
every federally funded grant
that both sexes,
we don't refer to gender
in scientific studies,
unless it's a study of gender, per se.
We refer to sex, meaning biological sex,
so that there's a stipulation,
that in order to receive and
continue to receive funding,
you have to do a studies on both males
and females of that
species, including humans.
- And at least, even if
you're not powered for it,
at least looking at that
in exploratory analysis.
Like as a grant reviewer,
I'm charged with looking at,
did they address sex as a biologically
relevant variable anyway?
- Right.
Does the same-
- You just throw it in there-
- Does the same drug
have different effects
in males versus females?
- Right.
And you could at least look
at the trends, even again,
if you're underpowered to look at those
between subject-type effects.
- Which is a great shift that didn't exist
10 years ago.
- Right.
- It sounds like we're
both on grants panels.
As study section members,
you didn't have to do that.
Now, it's an important
biological variable.
If you don't look at that,
you, essentially, won't get your funding.
- And age is a similar thing.
So if the whole idea, like,
man, if something could help kids,
what's the rationale?
So I think there's going to be...
Now, obviously, you're going
to have in those studies
at least just as much, probably more,
it should be more, of
a cautionary approach.
It's probably going to be...
It would certainly,
whatever disease states are looked at,
are going to to have to be
probably treatment resistant,
at least as a first step.
You know, hey,
the kids tried-
- Suicidal depression?
- Yeah, yeah.
And so all of that in the mix.
But hey, if this stuff really helps people
that are 25 or 30,
what's the rationale that it
won't help a younger person?
And there's these generic
kind of concerns about,
the developing nervous system,
is more susceptible to...
I mean, it cuts both ways,
'cause it's also more
"plastic" generally
- Yeah.
- and adaptable, maybe resilient
to injury in certain ways.
But you hear the rhetoric about kids,
their brains, and drugs,
and it's like the developing
brain is a special concern.
So yeah.
But I think we're going to be
seeing research eventually.
- That's interesting.
I went to the high school
that is infamous, sadly,
Gunn High School, for
having the highest degree,
at least at one point,
of highest suicide rate.
- Wow.
- A very large number of suicides.
This was written up in
the "Times" and elsewhere.
- Is it very academically
successful school?
- It's a very academically-
- There's a lot of
high pressure kind of-
- Yeah, a very academically
- demanding school,
- Yeah.
- to the point where they've restricted...
The kids will meet often at 6:30 AM
or 6:00 AM before school for study groups
and things of that sort.
So some of it may relate to that.
But I have to say,
that even prior to all
that academic pressure,
when I went there,
the pressure wasn't like that.
We had an unusual number of
suicides for whatever reason,
and so the idea of kids being prescribed,
and I want to emphasize prescribed,
not just using,
but prescribed psychedelics
for therapeutic purposes,
I think might make some people balk,
but the idea of kids killing themselves
should also make people balk.
And so I'm relieved to hear
that there's going to be
a rational, scientific,
safe clinical trial-based
exploration of this.
I want to ask you about the current status
of these drugs and compounds.
I'm pretty active on social media,
more so on Instagram than on Twitter.
But as I have been on Twitter
a little bit more recently,
I've noticed that
there's a lot of dialogue
around your account and
other people's accounts
around a couple of themes
related to psychedelics.
First of all, what is the
status of the transition
to legality for prescription purposes?
So medical doctors, MDs,
prescribing it legally
for therapeutic purposes.
That's the first question.
The second question is,
what is the status
as it relates to possession
and criminal charges?
So for a long time, I lived in Oakland,
where we were one day
told not too long ago,
it is now, quote/unquote,
"decriminalized" is what I was told.
Double check, people.
- That's right.
- But what does that mean?
And then the other issue,
and the third question,
and we can parse these one by one,
is this issue of,
let's just say, I'm aware
of a lot of investor dollars
going into companies
that are, essentially,
companies focused on
psychedelics as therapeutics,
or psychedelics generally.
I have to assume that they are investing
in anticipation of a
shift in the legal status.
And there's a lot of interest now,
like will psilocybin
become a taxable thing,
just like marijuana?
So let's start with the question of like,
what is going on in the US legally?
Is it illegal to possess, and
sell, and use these compounds?
My understanding is,
you can still go to jail
for having these compounds
in your possession,
or for selling.
- Right.
So even though the legal landscape
is very different than with cannabis,
there are some similarities.
So one of the similarities is,
that regardless of what local, municipal,
whether the city or
state is decriminalized,
and that word itself can mean many things.
Some forms of
decriminalization is close to
what folks would call legalization,
and others are pretty weak, just saying.
We suggest that the police
make it their lowest law
enforcement priority,
that type thing.
[interposing voices]
- Turn the other cheek
kind of thing.
- Right.
But even the cops can
still choose to-
- But someone could get
pulled over for one thing, searched,
and then by definition, if
it's illegal, and they find it,
- Right.
- then they have-
- So those are-
- They have to do
something about it.
- And that'll probably be determined by
both judicial precedent,
is it going to be thrown out,
and just the local prosecutor,
even before, are they going to choose,
even at post-arrest,
are going to pursue to really
go after those charges,
make those charges stick?
So I think that's still in play,
and is going to depend
on the municipality.
But like cannabis,
federally, these are all
Schedule I compounds.
- Which means they're illegal?
- Which means they're illegal.
The caveat to that,
just has always been the case
since Prop 215 in California
with cannabis in '96,
is that, hey, 99% of drug enforcement
is done at the local and state level.
The DEA, which is the federal
level of law enforcement,
is a tiny fraction of the arrests.
I mean, most people that
are arrested for any drug
are done by local or
state level authorities,
but it's still technically illegal.
And so you can,
and they could potentially,
depending on the ambiguity
of the local law,
even those local
officials could charge you
with a federal crime.
And theoretically, the
feds could always come in.
Now, although you'll...
Again, a similar case with
the whole cannabis history.
The feds came in in the early days,
but the folks that were,
basically, highly visible,
they went after Tommy
Chong for selling bongs.
I remember him being on
"The Tonight Show" one time,
and I think it was back
in the Jay Leno days.
He says, "But all along
the Santa Monica boardwalk
every shop sells bongs".
"How did you go to prison
for a half year for bongs?"
It's cause he was...
- 'Cause he was famous.
- 'Cause he was Tommy Chong,
and there was some high
profile cannabis groups
that were distributing it,
and that were very vocal.
Those were the ones raided
by the DEA in the early days,
not the ones kind of
keeping to themselves,
keeping it quiet, and
just doing their thing.
So there's always the potential
for selective enforcement.
And so in like this initiative in Oregon,
which is a state level
legalization of psilocybin therapy,
which is really interesting,
part of their plan for two years,
is to figure out how to
integrate with the federal level.
And I don't know how that's going to go,
because unless you rewrite
the Controlled Substances Act,
it seems like the best you're going to get
is a tolerance from
the federal government,
and that could be very,
hey, you change administrations-
- And this is psilocybin by a prescription
from a medical doctor,
or you're talking about therapists
who have master's degrees, or PhDs,
or self-appointed coaches,
or something like that
administering psilocybin,
but without any oversight?
- So this is all getting
figured out in the Oregon case.
And again, there's that
two year period of like,
basically, we're going to figure this out,
and so-
- What is it with Oregon?
- [laughs] They're ahead of a lot of...
You know, euthanasia.
- I love the state of Oregon.
- Yeah.
- But it's interesting how
you have these pockets.
Oregon and Vermont seems to be one.
You know, you've got these kind of pockets
where people are experimental
with plant compounds.
They seem to be green, woodsy areas,
at least in my mind.
But there's sort of a culture
- Yeah.
- around plants and the use
of plants as therapeutics.
- And combine that with the
West, just more geographically,
of more of the anti-federalism,
I mean, the Oregon ranchers
from several years ago
that held up the whatever, wildlife place,
and that was a big showdown with the feds,
just kind of the West is kind of known for
more of those issues.
So you combine the two,
the hippy-dippy California/Oregon vibe
with the kind of anti-
- Although, I would argue
it's becoming less hippy-dippy than...
Although, it was.
There's always been a tradition,
not just in the culture around drugs,
but certainly, in academia,
and in tech, et cetera,
that the West has been a place
where people have tried to
throw off traditionalism,
and kind of lineage like
who your parents are,
what school you went to,
and the past as a
determinant of what's next
and exciting about the future.
And here we are,
an East Coast institution guy
and a West Coast institution guy.
I think that it's this idea
of kind of innovation
and the future versus
do we stay grounded in
history and tradition?
- Right.
- And, of course,
there are great
institutions on both sides.
What's interesting, is that Hopkins,
Johns Hopkins Medical School,
I think of as a real like East
Coast academic institution.
It is on the East Coast.
But here you are doing
these very pioneering,
and important, and
exploratory studies in a,
certainly not a hippy-dippy environment.
- Right.
Oh, yeah, a very conservative
[interposing voices]
psychiatry department,
- Yeah.
- even amongst psychiatry departments.
- Right.
- And as a psychologist
in a psychiatry department,
psychiatry is certainly more
conservative than psychology,
even within academics.
But even amongst psychiatry departments,
it's very conservative department.
- So we got the law at the federal level,
we've got the law at the
state and local level,
and then we've got this question of
whether or not it's
going to be physicians,
so MDs, people with
PhDs or masters degrees,
or whether or not it will
be kind of a free for all
- Right.
- for consumption-
- The life coaches.
- The life coaches,
and the general public.
- Right.
- I mean, cannabis-
- Yeah.
- I'm not a pot smoker.
It's never appealed to me.
That's just me and my pharmacology.
But you can buy cannabis
most places in the US
without a ton of risk,
it seems, right?
- Right.
- Are we going to see a time in which
you can essentially go into a shop on a
Abbot Kinney Boulevard
in Venice, California?
And right now, you can go buy marijuana
if you have a marijuana card.
That's my understanding.
I see a lot of people going
in and out of these stores.
The police, certainly,
have no problem with it.
Is there going to come a time
where people can just go by psilocybin?
Do you think-
- Like they do in Amsterdam,
and have for a long time-
- Do you think
that time is coming?
- I think so, at a certain point,
and I don't know how long.
It's hard to imagine
our current level of drug
criminalization holding up for...
And I'm thinking like large spans of time.
Like, really, in 100 years,
are we going to be doing this 500 years?
How could that...
It's not going to be sustainable.
- But in five years, for instance?
- So I don't think so
in the United States.
I do think eventually
you're going to see something like that,
cause there's going to be no way,
and I think we're going to,
I hope that we're going to
eventually come so strongly,
we're going to move on from this
model of criminalizing drugs.
That we're really going to
focus on regulating drugs
at the right level for that drug.
And I like the word regulation
better than legalization.
I mean, I could imagine
what one day regulation,
smart regulation, might
mean for psychedelics.
Maybe it could mean that there will be,
whether or not you have
a diagnosis of a problem,
it may be that even for
personal exploration,
you can do this legally,
but you first have to maybe
take a court, get a drive.
and this has been, I'm
not the first to say this,
but get equivalent of a driver's license.
You have to go to get
some sort of training.
Maybe your first number of experiences
need to be with trained
guides who can facilitate it.
And then the public health information
for anyone using this,
that this is what risk your use is.
All use is going to have risks.
This is what risk your use is.
This is less risky use.
These are the factors.
So I think, eventually,
we're going to be...
But I would say the same
thing for methamphetamine,
and heroin, and cocaine.
All of these drugs,
it's hard to imagine the current approach
of just feeding a black market,
and really exasperating a
lot of the harms from drugs
that happens under the current model,
it's hard to imagine maintaining.
That isn't to say,
I think it should be in all
of the 7-Elevens sold to kids.
At the other extreme-
- I would hope not.
- But I do think it's
probably not going to be soon
in the United States.
I do want to make the major point,
that even if psychedelics
had never been made illegal,
I think the exact,
the trajectory of the
medical research right now
would still need to happen.
If it's effective as an antidepressant,
we need it to be...
There's all the evidence suggesting,
that whatever disorder
we're talking about,
the efficacy is going to be increased,
and the risks are going to
to be mitigated drastically
in the types of models we're talking about
with the screening, with the preparation,
with the integration of
cognitive behavioral therapy,
or what have you,
depending on the
disorder, you're treating,
with the integration afterwards
with the professionals.
We would be doing it anyway.
So it's not like this versus that.
So I don't see it as a race
between the decriminalization
or legalization of these compounds
versus their medical development.
Some people who are psychedelic fans
get all into a bunch about
the medical development.
They say, you guys want to like,
you want to keep it only for
your medical research in an ivory tower,
and you want to be in
control of it as academics.
And my take is, I didn't
make it illegal for anyone.
We're only moving the
needle in one direction.
And again, even if it
was already illegal...
And I've done plenty of survey
research of people reporting
they took mushrooms for fun,
or for personal exploration,
and they said, my god, why am I smoking,
and they quit smoking
20 years because of it,
or it's helped with their depression,
or it's helped with them
overcoming alcoholism,
or these [mumbles].
Sometimes that happens out of the blue
when people use psychedelics.
None the less,
obviously, the efficacy
rates are going to be higher
when you bring it into
these medical models,
and it's going to be safer.
- Sure.
- So we need to be pushing that.
And my best guess, is that
MDMA is going to be approved
within the next three years-
- For a prescription
by a physician?
- Yes.
And not just take two and
call me in the morning,
- Right.
- but in the clinics,
the way that those PTSD
trials are being run.
So the MDMA would be approved for PTSD,
and every disorder needs
to be looked at separately,
and it's going to only be
approved for those things.
Now, there's going to be-
- Right, 'cause approved,
and legalized, and regulated,
now, we're getting into the nuance.
I think when people hear
it's going to be approved in two years,
they think that they'll
be able to buy, and sell,
and use MDMA without legal consequences,
and I do not think that's
going to be the situation.
- Right, that's not going to
be the case.
- It's not the way it is.
And I will say, that I think the,
quote/unquote, "psychedelic community",
I mean, they've been
doing what they want to,
and will carry on doing what
they want to anyway, right?
It's not like the legal status has
- [Dr. Matthew] Yeah.
- prevented them from
doing what they're doing.
In fact, unlike Leary, and
Timothy Leary, and Huxley,
and some of the others
that were very vocal
and lost their jobs,
and some of 'em even
went to jail, et cetera.
I mean, you've got a lot
of public figures now,
like McKenna and others,
who are just basically out there
talking about psychedelics.
Michael Pollan, who's more of a writer,
foodie guide gone psychedelic
dabbler writer guy.
I know he's kind of a polymath.
You know, the legal status
didn't seem to hinder their,
at least, online careers.
I don't know.
I haven't looked at their bank accounts.
But I'm imagining they're doing just fine,
right?
- Right.
- So the fact that the work is happening
inside of big institutions,
I think it's important that you point out,
and I'm just trying to underscore,
that that's in no way antagonistic
to what people are doing.
It's in support of a
different sort of mission,
which is to explore the
validity in different contexts
in a really controlled way,
which I really,
I think it's a really important mission.
I want to make sure that I ask you about
the other really important mission
that you're involved in with
respect to psychedelics,
which is not about depression, per se,
but is about neurological,
neurologic injury or head injury.
I realize, it's early days for this,
but I think there's a lot of
concussion out there, sadly.
There's a lot of TBI,
traumatic brain injury.
- Yeah.
- Not just from sports.
I think people sometimes
forget that it's not,
the major source of traumatic
head injury is not football.
It's not hockey.
It's not boxing.
It's not any of that stuff.
It's construction workers,
- Ah, yeah!
- and it's-
- Yeah.
- I mean,
if you've ever seen the helmets
that construction workers wear.
I mean, that-
- The jackhammer,
- Yeah.
- oh, my god.
- The jack hammer-
- I mean, how could that
not be just like-
- Yeah.
I have a colleague that works
on this in bioengineering.
And when you look at the...
You know, we always think sports,
but there are many
people who make a living
in a way that is,
over time, is detrimental to their brain,
and they don't have the option
of just not being a professional athlete,
or something of that sort.
- And if they're not
doing the construction,
someone else needs to it-
- Someone else has
to do it, right.
And for some reason, and I, too,
I didn't occur to me until I heard it,
like the people who
are doing construction.
And then, of course, bike
accidents, and falls,
and things like that as well.
So-
- Military.
- Military, absolutely.
- Yeah.
- So what do you think is the
potential for these compounds,
particular psilocybin, but
other compounds as well,
for the treatment and
possible even reversal
of neurological injuries,
and what sorts of things
are you excited to do in that realm?
- Yeah, so this is definitely
on the more exploratory end.
So it's based upon...
You know, this is sort of beyond
the improvement of psychiatric disorders,
like depression, or depression anxiety
associated with a terminal illness,
or a substance use
disorder, the addiction.
So those are sort of
psychiatric disorders.
So this is...
There are anecdotes of people saying,
that psychedelics have
helped heal their brain.
They've been in one of these
situations, like in sports,
a sport where there's
repetitive head impact,
and they're claiming
that using psychedelics
has actually improved
their cognitive function,
for example, improve their memory,
including improve their mood.
But it's kind of more of
the cognitive function,
things like memory are...
Now, the caveat is,
if you've successfully
improved someone's depression,
you can get some
cognitive improvement too,
- Sure.
- but that's more
of a weaker, more indirect effect.
But if you take these anecdotes,
and you combine it way
across orders of analysis
to the rodent research from several labs,
like David Olson, Brian Roth,
these folks that have shown
different forms of neural
plasticity unfolding after,
like sort of post-acutely.
so after, in the days following
the administration of
psychedelic compounds,
a variety of psychedelic compounds,
and even some non-psychedelic
structural analogs,
that you see these different
forms of neural plasticity.
So the growth of dendrites,
and new connections being
formed with different neurons.
Those effects may be at play,
and then prove,
in the psychiatric treatments
that we're dealing with,
that we don't know that.
It seems like a decent guess,
and we're going to be figuring
out whether that's the case.
But another potential that sets up,
is that maybe that's, what's going on
with these claims of improvements
from neurological issues,
that there's actually
repair of the brain from injuries
underlying things that...
Situations where there's
repetitive head impact,
perhaps there's a potential for
helping folks recover from stroke,
and disorders like that.
There's a wide variety of disorders.
Now, it's a bit of
magic, and a bit of like,
it's something that
the enthusiasts kind of
can do some hand waving,
and claim that this is already known.
It is more exploratory.
But what I'm hoping to do with some work
with retired athletes
who had been exposed.
By the nature of their sport, for example,
MMA athletes in the UFC
who have been exposed to
repetitive head impacts,
like a lot of sports expose people to,
and who are retired from the sport,
and are suffering from, say, depression,
which can, impart, result
from those types of,
that history of head impact.
See if we can fix the depression,
but then also as a cherry on top,
in a more exploratory aim,
see if we can have evidence of
improvement in cognitive function,
and associate like using MRI
to see if it affects
gray matter over time,
these types of things,
to see if there actually is
some evidence of this improved,
like this more direct repair of the brain.
But again, it is very sort of like,
we've got some rodent data.
We've got some human anecdotes.
- We will acknowledge it's early days,
and we look forward to seeing the data.
I appreciate how cautious you are,
attentive you are.
You're not drawing any conclusions.
I think from a purely logical
and somewhat mechanistic perspective,
I mean, if we assume that
lack of ability to focus,
or degradation and mood is the
reflection of neurons in the brain,
I think we can agree on that,
some dialogue between
neurons and the brain,
and that what needs to be changed
is the nature of that dialogue,
aka, neural plasticity.
We know that reordering of
neural circuitry require,
in the adult, requires these things,
like intense focus,
followed by rest, et cetera.
But the basis for that,
like beneath, focuses the mechanism,
is a mechanism, rather,
beneath the bin that we call
deep rest is a mechanism,
and those mechanisms are
neuromodulator driven.
So, to me, you're...
I'm not reviewing your grant.
But from a rational perspective,
it seems that drugs that
increase certain neuromodulators,
like serotonin or dopamine,
in a controlled way,
and then coupling that
with learning of some sort,
sensory input of some sort,
it makes sense that would lead to,
could, I should say,
lead to reordering of circuitry
that would allow for better
thinking, better mood,
many of the same things
that you've observed
in the clinical trials for depression.
So the rationale is really strong.
I think that's a very exciting area.
I get asked all the time about TBI,
and traumatic brain injury,
and right now, it's kind of,
there isn't a whole
lot that people can do,
and people are dabbling in
the space of hyperbaric chambers,
and people will do sauna and breath work,
and people are kind of
clipping at the margins
of what really is a problem
that resides deep to the skull.
So I think, I just want to
applaud the exploration.
I think it's great,
provided that exploration is
being done in a controlled way.
It sounds like that's what
you're doing with the UFC?
- Yeah, so that's-
- A great-
- They were really gracious,
and had myself and a few of my colleagues
out to their headquarters in Vegas,
and-
- Impressive place, right?
- It's in process.
- Yeah.
- You know,
there's a dialogue going on there.
I'm hopeful that there's going
to be some work with them.
But it's in process now,
in terms of exploring it.
There's a real interest,
and I'm just really
impressed by the organization
and their commitment
- Yeah.
- to athlete health,
and we'll see.
- I am too.
Yeah, I am too.
We have a colleague out there.
We're doing a little
bit of work with them.
Dunkin French, who's a serious
academic in his own right.
And I think when people hear UFC,
they just think about the
octagon, and fighting,
and Pay-per-view fights, and things.
But in talking with them,
and I'm sure you've had
these discussions as well,
they are very much
interested in the health
and longevity of their fighters.
They are also interested in the health
and longevity of their
fighters being a template
for how to treat traumatic brain injury,
and improve human
performance in other sports,
and in the general public.
And I think it's not an image of the UFC
that commonly comes to mind,
'cause they haven't been
particularly verbal about it in the press.
But I think it's great
they're bringing in academics.
I mean, geeks like us
going out to the UFC Performance center.
I mean, you do MMA,
but I'm basically just a geek
walking through the place.
But the fact that they're interested
in talking to scientists is really,
I'm biased here,
but a point in their favor.
Along the lines of other groups
and individuals that
have impacted the space
that you're working in in this pioneering
of the psychedelic space,
a few years ago, I think,
if someone submitted a grant saying,
I want to study how psilocybin
impacts human depression,
I'm guessing, having worked
on these panels before,
that the response might've been closer to,
well, we need to do a lot
of studies in rodents,
and a lot of studies in primates,
and then maybe, just maybe,
we could explore these drugs,
because the National Institutes
of Health actually has
a whole institute devoted
to addiction, right?
- Mm-hmm.
- Of exploring compounds
only in terms of their negative effects,
right?
- Yeah.
- Which is a very-
- NIDA,
which is where I've gotten
all of my NIH funding
over my career.
- Which is so interesting,
right?
- Yeah, uh-huh.
- And it's a super important institute.
I want to be clear,
there are amazing people there.
But philanthropy and foundations have been
very important in supporting
pioneering research,
and so maybe we just talk
a little bit about that?
So your lab receives funding
from taxpayer dollars
through the National Institutes of Health?
Is that mainly where
your funding comes from?
- So our group has gotten
some funding from like,
say, the National Institute
on Drug Abuse, NIDA.
For some, a small subset
of the psychedelic work,
but only for some work geared towards
understanding these
things as drugs of abuse.
- Right.
- Of course,
when you do a study, though,
[interposing voices]
- Explore how they're bad.
- Right.
- Right, right.
But when you're doing that,
you can explore like the good stuff too.
But the large majority of the work,
and the most interesting work,
has been funded by philanthropy.
- Private philanthropy.
- Now, I still have
some grant support from NIDA
outside of psychedelics.
- Right.
- I'm shifting more
and more of my time towards
focusing only on psychedelics.
And in fact, us getting
the center-level funding
from some really big
picture philanthropists
helped me to start to
make that transition.
But groups like the Heffter
Research organization,
Dennis McKenna, which is
one of the founding members,
the brother of Terence McKenna,
who is, by the way, an ethnobotanist.
That's what his PhD is in.
- What does that mean,
ethnobtanist?
- Studying, essentially, the anthropology
of psychoactive plant use.
So, you know-
- Wow!
You can get a degree in that?
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
You know, hanging out with cultures,
and studying their use of these compounds
in the traditional ways.
- Wow!
At Hopkins?
That degree exists at Johns Hopkins?
- I don't think that
degree exists at Hopkins,
- Oh, okay.
- but I mean,
kind of the most...
As you know from academia, I'm not...
You know, sometimes folks...
I'm not sure how many people's PhD
is actually in ethnobotany,
or if it's actually in
- Yeah, I've never heard of-
- something else.
But the real focus is...
My degree is general
experimental psychology.
- Ten thousand kids out there just decided
they're going to major in ethnobotany,
but, you know-
- I mean,
one of the pioneers of
the psychedelic area,
before Leary, and before,
and actually, he was late,
even for the human researchers.
Folks like Humphry
Osmond, and Abram Hoffer,
and Sidney Cohen were earlier.
But even before those folks,
Richard Schultes at Harvard,
I mentioned him earlier
in the conversation,
discovered all of this now.
These various tribes
using ayahuasca or yag,
a different name for the same thing,
throughout South America,
and these DMT containing
snuffs, and all of this.
So that was ethnobotany,
this kind of intersection of anthropology
and these psychoactive plant compounds.
So the Heffter Research Institute,
which Dennis is a founding
and active member of,
a board member,
they have funded a lot of our early work.
There's also an organization called
the Beckley Institute based in England,
that a lady, Amanda Feilding,
has been the head of,
that has...
They provided the first funding
for our psilocybin smoking
cessation research,
and then Heffter came in and
provided subsequent funding.
And then there are other groups.
The Council on Spiritual Practices.
A great guy named Bob Jesse
funded some of the
original work at Hopkins,
looking at the nature
of mystical experience
outside of treating disease
states or disorders.
But just
[Huberman speaks indistinctly]
understanding these...
Like people take these compounds,
and astonishingly, frequently, will say,
that was the most important
thing I've ever experienced.
And it's like, what the hell is that?
You know?
- I had someone
mention recently,
and I think this might
surprise people a little bit.
It's certainly surprised me.
I had a friend who adores his children.
He's got three children.
He adores his children.
Happy marriage and a great father.
They're both great parents.
And he told me, that as
part of a clinical trial,
he had a DMT experience that he claims,
he said, "I'd love to tell you
that the birth of my
children was as profound,
but that was a more profound experience
than the birth of my children,
any one of them and all of them combined".
And I was like, "Wow!"
Now, I've never done DMT,
but I was like, "Wow, that's
a pretty strong statement".
Now, he did it in the context
of one of these clinical explorations
I assume that was part of
a legal clinical trial.
I mean, that's saying something.
- Yeah.
- It's saying something.
I mean, he's a very rational,
very grounded guy, otherwise.
So philanthropy foundations.
- Yeah.
- And then in-
- Most recently,
and sorry, just I can't,
- Mm-hmm, yeah.
- 'cause I can't skip it.
Our center level funding
- Oh, yeah,
you can't skip-
- which came at
a year and a half,
- I see.
- that's like, we...
I mean, the Heffter
group, the Beckley group,
I mean, these are wonderful.
I mean, these are people
that have been holding the flame alive
during the darkest hours.
Same thing with the MAPS organization
more on the MDMA side,
like holding that candle
during the darkest years.
You know, so we've...
Smaller organizations
connected to smaller,
but growing over time, pockets of wealth.
But we basically limped along on a wing
and a prayer until recently,
when we got the $17 million gift,
so that we could create a nominal center.
And as you know,
basically, to the university,
that means you get a
certain number of dollars,
and a lot of them, you can
call yourself a center.
It's a capital investment.
Staff, equipment, salary, support,
which has always been
the huge thing for us.
But the $17 million gift,
which was split between
the Cohen foundation,
so Steven and Alexandra Cohen,
they covered half of it,
and the other half, the
Tim Ferriss collaborative.
Basically, Tim and a
few friends ponied up,
divided the rest of that,
half of that $17 million gift,
and came together to just...
I mean, it's completely transformed our,
the work that we've done,
and our ability to fully
delve into this area,
and not worry that, like,
oh, if I focus on this,
rather than putting
another three NIDA grants
on some other topic that
may or may not get funded,
if I focus too much on the psychedelics,
am I putting my career at jeopardy?
Like so-
- But you're now
not only a tenured professor,
you're also a full endowed-
- Right.
So that came-
- By the way,
when you say somebody is
a fully endowed professor,
[Dr. Matthew laughs]
- I want to be very clear
what that means.
That means that
there's funding-
- Well, it might mean
all of the above, but
no, I'm joking [laughs].
- I have no knowledge of
your particular situation,
but you probably do.
- Just kidding.
- But sure.
What we're essentially saying,
is that funding,
which does not change
somebody's salary level...
I just want to be clear,
'cause I think the general public isn't...
There's no reason why
they would understand
all the nuts and bolts of how this works.
- Academia is weird.
- Yeah.
Academia is weird,
because we're not
talking about increasing.
We're not talking about an endowment
or philanthropy that went
to increase Matt's salary.
That something that's set
at the university level.
It's always been said,
and it is, at least, is still true now,
which is that nobody goes
into science for the money,
at least not at the academic level,
not in academia.
But allows people to
devote more of their time
and energy to these exploratory realms,
like psychedelic research,
or the case of my lab,
the work that we're doing
with David Spiegel's lab,
on respiration breath work
and hypnosis for modulating brain states.
These are not typically areas
that the National Institutes of Health
and other major organizations have,
institutions set up to support.
Now, there is an exciting initiative,
which is the NCCIH,
which is Complimentary Health.
- Right.
Used to be NCCAM.
- Yep.
- Yeah,
and they changed their name.
- At NIH.
- Yeah.
- And now,
we're not just throwing out acronyms
just to bat back and forth acronyms.
But I think what we're looking,
what we're seeing now
is a movement toward science,
and scientists, and clinicians,
and the general public, and
philanthropy being engaged
in this dialogue, which says,
okay, there are problems in the world,
depression, head trauma,
psychological trauma, PTSD, ADHD.
These problems clearly exist.
The solutions are going
to involve behaviors
that are going to involve nutrition,
supplementation, social connection.
However, there are drugs,
there are compounds that
can change the brain,
and allow the brain to
change its circuitry through experience,
and psychedelics are
one of several others,
but one of the powerful
leavers, it sounds like.
And I just want to say,
that I think the reason
I reached out to you,
and I'm so excited to sit
down and chat with you is,
because I see very few people
inside the halls of academia
who have thrown their arms around
this issue of psychedelics in a way,
and gone through the trouble of trying to
find the funding to get it done,
gone through the trouble
of trying to set up clinical trials.
I know what's involved in doing this.
It's so complicated.
It's so time-consuming and painstaking.
And you've made real progress.
I mean, you guys are publishing papers.
There's a new dialogue emerging
that isn't just books on bookshelves
and psychedelic, psychonaut
gurus on the internet,
who also play an important role.
But you're really moving
this field forward.
And I know there are others as well.
There are colleagues in
England and others as well.
We acknowledge them.
But I just want to say personally,
that I'm inspired
and impressed by the way
that you've gone about this,
and the level of rigor.
I mean, when I ask you a
question about serotonin,
most people will just
kind of kick back to me,
well, yeah, you got receptors,
and you've got a ligand,
but I mean, it's clear to me
that you care about the details,
and that you care about
the future of this area,
and you also really care
about these patients
and these individuals.
So I know I'm speaking on
behalf of a ton of people now,
and in the future,
that don't even know what
they're going to receive
as a consequence of this.
I just want to voice a real sincere
thank you for that effort.
It's like your lab and your work matters,
and that's a really
special and unique thing.
- I appreciate that.
In fact, I had a good colleague,
in fact, she shared some grants support
under the multi-PI system years ago,
and she actually took a job
at NIH as a review officer.
And I remember her telling me...
And she actually left when
she had multiple RO1s.
So it's like-
- RO1s are kind of
the bread and butter,
- Big picture grant.
- big grants
- Yeah.
- that every card carrying...
It's a mark of respect in our community
to have one or several of these, yeah.
- Yeah, yeah.
It's like you eat what
you kill in academia.
It gets to what we were
talking about later,
it's like you don't make more
money by pulling more grants,
but you're able to pay the salary that...
The university doesn't
pay you your salary.
It goes through them.
- Right.
You're just able to do more work.
- Yeah.
- And you're able to...
And if you don't pull in the
grants to cover your salary,
your job can come to an end.
Even if you're tenured
at a place like Hopkins,
they can do tricks,
like slowly lower
your salary over-
- Well, they just let-
[interposing voices]
Or they just take away your space.
- Yeah, they put you in a closet,
and give you no support for trainees,
and basically make life hell for you.
So you can drive
- It happens.
- a cab in Baltimore,
and call yourself a full
professor at Hopkins, truthfully,
but you may not have no ability
to get anything done.
- I'm sure they're out there.
- But yeah, I remember one of the things
this colleague has said,
who's is successful, but left on top said,
"I really don't know
that I'm making a
difference in the world?"
And she did some great memory research
and connected to drugs,
also connected to aging.
But she said, "I don't feel the impact
of what I'm doing in the real world".
Unfortunately, there,
for a lot of academia,
what we do, it stays in the ivory tower.
The world is a...
- Not anymore.
- It's a beautiful,
but messed up place,
[Dr. Huberman laughs]
and a lot of this doesn't disseminate,
- [Dr. Huberman] Right.
- because of the various structures,
the way the world is set up.
And thankfully, this...
I mean, because the work that our group,
as well as a few others around the world,
over the last 20 years,
it's like you do have an emerging
psychedelic startup industry now
with billions of dollars of investment.
And yeah, that's going to
turn into both good and bad.
You know, it's upping the ante.
There's going to be a lot of good
and bad that comes from that,
- Sure.
- but any new technology
is going to result in that.
But we've got psilocybin
designated for two separate entities
as a breakthrough therapy by the FDA,
and people may not realize,
and the MDMA is designated
as a breakthrough therapy for PTSD.
This is a really big deal.
That's a very high...
I mean, pharma companies
would pay millions of dollars
to get their new drug a
designation like that.
And what it means,
is early research is showing,
saying it shows a high
potential for treating disorders
that don't have very good treatments.
And we're probably, again, a
few years away from both MDMA,
probably a year or two,
after that psilocybin,
and being treated for PTSD
and depression respectively.
You know, we have to wait
for the Phase 3 studies,
but if the results hold up...
Even if the effect size is halved
of what we're seeing now,
it's still going to be a lot larger
than what you're seeing with
the traditional medications.
And so it's going to be
approved, if the data hold up,
and it probably will from my judgment.
So I feel like what I'm doing
is actually having a
positive impact in the world
in a way that...
And I feel lucky that I
got interested in an area
that happens to plug
into a place in the world
where there is that opportunity,
where some great colleagues
and friends are focused on areas
where I wish they had the opportunity
for their work to be disseminated.
I mean, I was lucky to be interviewed
on "60 Minutes" because of this work.
And I was like, oh, my
god, I know so many...
There's a bit of imposter syndrome,
like, oh, my god, I
know so many scientists
that deserve, more so than me, to be,
had that level of exposure.
But if you happen to
be in that place where,
you got to do your best to make it work,
to take advantage of that luck,
and that intersection of
the world, and to push it.
I've been lucky,
but I also did take a bit
of a leap of faith early on.
I did have some advisors
that told me, like,
you've got a really
promising pedigree early on,
like, are you sure you want to focus
much time on this psychedelic stuff?
- Yeah, you've embraced risk.
I mean, I think that...
I mean, the world's changed
since, in 2020, certainly,
but channels like social media, podcasts,
and things of that sort,
your exposure is
because people are
interested in these topics,
and that's why people, like myself,
are interested in talking to you.
I mean at Stanford,
there are now a few labs
starting to explore psychedelics,
more at the mechanistic level,
so in animal models.
Some excellent labs.
But also, I can imagine,
because of the pioneering work
that you've done at Hopkins,
it'll start to become more common.
I'm certain that people are
going to have questions about
how to get in contact
with you and learn more.
If people have trauma, PTSD, depression,
it's likely that they're
going start seeking ways
in which they can potentially
participate in clinical trials.
You're very active on Twitter.
Active, I should say.
You've got other obligations,
but where you are active on social media,
you're active on Twitter.
It's @drug_researcher,
correct?
- Right, right.
Right.
- Okay.
So get-
- It's drug_researcher,
that's how to find me.
- A great account, by the way.
Matthew and I recently
got into a dialogue there
about some of the deeper
effects of psychedelics
in the literature versus
how they're being discussed
in the general public.
I follow his account,
and it's a really wonderful account for
whether or not you have a
science background or not.
If people are...
And I'm going to try and persuade you
to be more active on Instagram,
but I don't know
if I'll succeed in that.
[Dr. Matthew laughs]
- I'll try to get my
Instagram game going on.
- You're a busy guy,
and I get it.
I'm running a lab too.
I get it.
You're busy.
Drug_researcher there as well.
- The same handle, huh?
- The same handle.
Your lab at Hopkins is pretty
straightforward to find
through a Google Search of your name,
Matthew Johnson, Johns Hopkins University.
Are there portals for people
to explore clinical trials,
participation in clinical
trials of various kinds?
- Yeah, and so in our group,
so you go to Hopkinspsychedelic.org.
That's the website.
And if you can't remember that,
just Johns Hopkins
psychedelic.
- We will provide a link.
Yeah, we will provide a link.
- Yeah,
and you're going to find us.
It'll be the first thing that pops up.
And we have...
Trust me, if we have a study on something,
it's going to be on that website.
- That means-
[interposing voices]
They're being very polite,
so I will be a little bit
more aggressive, and say,
don't email him directly.
He won't see that email.
Wait until there's a posting for a study,
and then sign up through
the correct portal.
- Right.
And I try to get back to those emails,
but frankly, and it's 'cause I'm lucky
the area has taken off so much,
but there are many days
where I simply get so many
- Well, you have to do-
- requests that I can't
get through my day.
- You have to do the research.
- Yeah, if I answer all the...
So yeah, trust me.
And something that a
lot of folks don't get,
and being in academia like we are,
it's easy to forget how people don't,
understandably, don't realize this.
This is experimental research.
It's FDA-approved as an experiment,
so we're working towards
formal FDA approval
for straight up clinical use.
But right now, someone
can't bring me a case
of some idiosyncratic thing, and say,
I'm suffering from this
complex constellation,
like depression-
- You're not a clinician.
- Yeah, I'm not...
And even if I was,
I wouldn't be able to
treat them with psilocybin,
or to send them anywhere
that was legal to take it.
So if we're going to be treating you,
it has to be,
or anyone else in the United States,
or most other countries for that matter,
it's going to have to be under the guise
of a very specific protocol.
This number of milligrams to treat PTSD,
to treat major depressive disorder,
to treat, treatment resistant
tobacco use disorder,
so nicotine addiction.
Very specific studies.
This is not one-off treatment.
And folks say, like, oh, I can
pay to go out to Baltimore.
Well, my son has this complex.
And they're tragic cases, but you...
So if you're interested in
a study, go to our website.
If it's not on their website,
we don't have a study on it.
There are going to be forthcoming studies.
So I'm going to be starting studies
on opioid addiction and PTSD,
and an LSD study for chronic pain.
The day that those are
open for recruitment,
they're going to be up on our website.
- Great.
- So that's where
you look to see everything.
And in fact, I just recently,
a couple of days ago,
put up a couple of surveys studies,
also where we post a
link to our survey study.
So if you've had psychedelics,
and you've taken them for
therapeutic intent for PTSD,
or for depression, or anxiety,
you can find a link.
And also, if you've done
breath work for those reasons,
we have a link for a study
of that type up there now,
which is a holotropic-style,
a very psychedelic-type
- Interesting.
- of breathing technique
that can lead to some of
these similar experiences.
So it's up there.
More broadly, outside of our group,
'cause there's a growing number
of groups in the US doing this,
and in Europe doing this research,
but you can go to Clinicaltrials.gov,
and if you look in for the
main search term of psilocybin,
or MDMA, or psychedelic,
plug in those terms,
you can get a list of the growing number.
I mean, I think there's over 40, maybe.
It's been awhile.
There might be over 50 now.
I don't know.
But studies with just psilocybin going on
right now on Clinicaltrials.gov.
So check out Clinicaltrials.gov
to see what's going on.
But it's going to be...
If you're going to do anything legal,
it's going to be in the context
of a very specific study.
It's not going to be one-off treatment.
- Right, and I should say,
- Yeah.
- and not just legal,
but also supported in the right framework
that you described,
of having a team, et cetera.
Obviously, people will
do what they will do.
[interposing voices]
- And if-
- Oh, yeah, go ahead.
- I will say, if people...
I never encourage people
to take drugs of any...
I don't encourage caffeine use.
Every drug has its risk,
you know?
- I encourage
my own caffeine use,
but nobody else's.
- Yeah.
I'm drinking up right now.
This is great.
- Yeah,
this is a very strong mat.
It's what we're drinking.
It has not lead to a alteration,
in my perception, of self
to the extent that we
talked about earlier.
However, this conversation,
was a good example
of how we can enter a perceptual bubble.
I learned so much about psychedelics,
and the future of this
for the sake of mental health,
and other aspects of health.
Matt, thank you so much
- Thank you, Andrew.
- for your time,
for your knowledge.
And I think you put it best earlier,
for holding the candle
in a very dark time,
and then now, there's light.
- Thank you.
Well, thanks for helping
to spread that light,
and I really appreciate
what you've been doing.
This is a great, great medium
that you have going on.
So thank you for doing it.
- It's my pleasure.
Thank you.
Thank you for joining me
for my conversation with
Dr. Matthew Johnson.
If you're enjoying this
podcast, and learning from it,
please subscribe to our YouTube channel.
In addition, you can leave
comments and suggestions
for future podcast topics
and guests in the comment
section on YouTube.
As well, please consider
subscribing on Apple
and on Spotify.
And on Apple,
you can leave us up to a five
star review and a comment.
Please also check out the
sponsors that we mentioned
at the beginning of today's episode.
That's a terrific way
to support our podcast.
In addition, many of you have
questions about supplements.
We've partnered with Thorne.
That's Thorne, T-H-O-R-N-E,
because Thorne has the
highest quality standards
with respect to the
quality of ingredients
in their supplements,
as well as precision about the amounts
of those ingredients
within their supplements.
If you go to Thorne.com/U/Huberman,
you can see all the
supplements that I take,
and you can get 20% off
any of those supplements,
as well as 20% off any
of the other supplements
that you find on the Thorne site.
So if you enter the Thorne
site through that portal,
excuse me, thorne.com/u/huberman,
you'll get 20% off any of the
products that Thorne makes.
Also, we have a Patreon.
It's patreon.com/andrewhuberman.
And there, you can support the podcast
at any level that you like.
And last but not least,
thank you for your interest in science.
[upbeat instrumental music]